







 nAlaTiyAr -English Translation by Pope and Ellis  (in tamil script, unicode format)







 நாலடியார்  
ஆங்கில மொழிபெயர்ப்பு  போப் மற்றும் எல்லிஸ் 
Naladiyar verses with English Translation 
by Rev. G.U.Pope and F.W. Ellis
In unicode/utf-8 format
 


Acknowledgements: 
Our Sincere thanks go to Archives.org for providing a scanned PDF copy of this work 
The e-text has been generated using Google OCR and subsequently edited by K.Kalyanasundaram.
We thank Mrs. Priya Kulandaivelu for her help in proof-reading the etext file.
Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne, Switzerland.

© Project Madurai, 1998-2020.
Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted to preparation 
of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them free on the Internet. 
Details of Project Madurai are available at the website 
https://www.projectmadurai.org/
You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this header page is kept intact.


 நாலடியார்  
ஆங்கில மொழிபெயர்ப்பு - போப் மற்றும் எல்லிஸ்  
Naladiyar verses with English Translation 
by Rev. G.U.Pope and F.W. Ellis

Source:
Naladiyar with Translations in English by 
Rev. Dr. G.U. Pope and Mr. F.W. Ellis 
Forward by Dr. M. Varadarajanar 
The South Indai Saiva Siddhantha Works Publishing Society 
Tinnevelly, Madras- 1 
© 1963  (first edition March 1958)
Publication No:  927 
Appar Achakam, Madras-1. 
--------------

 CONTENTS  
Forward 
Introduction 
Index to Chapters 
Text and Translation 
F.W. Ellis' Translation of some Quatrains 
Index to Quatrains 
Glossary
Photo  Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope 
--------
 FOREWORD 

Of the great ancient works of Tamilnad known for their moral profundity and weighty 
comments on life and thought, Tirukkural and Naladiyar stand foremost. The proverbial 
saying  "நாலும்இரண்டும்சொல்லுக்குஉறுதி '' (the couplets of Tirukkural and the quatrains 
of Naladiyar are the best of ethical sayings) glorifies their value in a single sentence. 
Great ethical and philosophical utterances have been rendered in poetic form in Naladiyar. 
The poetic value of the stanzas cannot be underestimated although it is true 
that their moral value pre-eminently appeals to the readers. W. H. Hudson observes: 
“there is no reason why poetry should not be the outcome of philosophy and 
the vehicle of philosophic truth without sacrificing anything of its essential poetic 
qualities and graces.” Naladiyar belongs to that category of poetry which celebrates 
philosophic truth without sacrificing itsessential poetic charm. The writers of 
these stanzas were poets who also wished to be great teachers and moralists. 

The authorship of this work is ascribed to a group of Jain ascetics who lived in the 
third or fourth century A.D. Its compilation has a tale to tell. In a critical situation 
of famine in the Pandiya Country, a group of eight thousand Jain ascetics left 
their place each leaving a stanza behind him. Of them four hundred are said to 
have been selected and compiled. The stanzas themselves testify to the fact 
that this is not the work of a single author, but of many belonging to the same 
school and age. That is why we find repetition of ideas as in stanzas 207 and 
210 and similarity of expression as in stanzas 230 and 238. That this work is later 
than Tirukkural is evident from the classification and arrangement of chapters 
on the model of the latter, the whole work consisting of three parts and each 
chapter containing ten stanzas. But this classification is not so apt and so complete 
as in Tirukkural, as may be seen from the loose connection of the following 
stanzas to the chapters in which they are placed :-

 Stanza No. 	 Chapter No. 
 33, 34, 35, 39, 40 	4
 58 	6
 78 to 80 	8
 102 	11
 111 to 120 	12
 124 to 126, 128 	13
 181 to 183 	19

The words and ideas expressed in stanza No.305 are not different from those of the 
Tirukkural couplets Nos. 1061 and 1069. 

This is a Jain work laying great stress on renunciation. The ascetic note is struck in 
almost all the chapters except those on High birth (15), The Support of kindred (21), 
Scrutiny in forming friendships (22), Bearing and forbearing in friendship (23), 
Unreal friend ship (24) and Chaste matronhood (247). Yet, like Tirukkural, it appeals 
to the learned of all religions and sects by virtue of the eternal truths it explains and 
the moral philosophy it expounds. There is also a special effectiveness in elucidating 
certain ideas in four lines with appropriate emotional fervour as in stanzas 36, 40 and 83, 
which is not so easily possible in the couplets of Tirukkural. 

The whole struggle of the human race from barbarism to civilisation is one continuous 
effort to maintain and extend its moral dignity. The learned among the ancient 
Tamils had perceived this clearly and laid due emphasis in their teachings on the 
moral and ethical aspects of human life. The Tamils are fortunate enough in having 
preserved these noble teachings in their ancient language and, as Dr. G. U. Pope 
has remarked, “Tirukkural and Naladiyar throw a flood of light upon the whole ethical 
and social philosophy of the Tamil people.” Dr. Pope's characteristic enthusiasm, 
sincerity and passionate search for truth enabled him to realise the value of these 
works and introduce them to the Westerners through his translations. He carried 
out his project very successfully. The grammatical notes, the metrical introduction 
and the lexicon and concordance appended to his translation are scholarly and 
instructive. His translation has an inspiring quality and is nowhere a travesty of the 
original. We are greatly indebted to him for his valuable services to the advancement of 
Tamil language and literature. 

The South India Saiva Siddhanta Works Publishing Society deserves our 
congratulations and thanks for having published this useful translation of Naladiyarby 
a renowned scholar and ardent lover of Tamil. F. W. Ellis' translation of some of the 
stanzas given at the end of the book adds to the value of this publication. 

Madras-30, 17-2-1958. 	M. Varadarajan 
----------

INTRODUCTION

THIS edition of a popular Tamil Classic was undertaken mainly with the view of assisting Europeans to acquire some acquaintance with classical Tamil. It is intended to be taken up after the study of the Second Catechism of Tamil Grammar; and is a companion volume to the Kurral: these two great works serving as mutual commentaries, and together throwing a flood of light upon the whole ethical and social philosophy of the Tamil people. 

I am not without a hope and belief that such editions of their great classics may find favour with some at least of the great multitude of young Tamil men who pursue with enthusiasm and fair success their English studies, but are, I apprehend, in some danger, alas ! of neglecting their own wonderful language. 

To avoid repetition, the student is referred to the introduction to the Kurral for information on many matters connected with Tamil, and important to those who would thoroughly master the Naladi. 

This work is recommended to the student of Tamil for several weighty reasons. 

These are not so much the originality of its teaching, as the peculiar terseness and vigour of its style ; and the fidelity with which it reflects the thoughts and ideas of the great mass of the Tamil people, and indeed of the yeomanry of India ; for, though composed most probably by Jains, it contains scarcely any traces of their peculiar tenets. For these the student must read the Jivaga Chintamani, and this is no easytask, though made easier by the publication of an admirable edition of it by Mr. Ve. Caminathaiyar. 

The Naladi-nannurru, or ‘Four Hundred Quatrains,' is often called the Vellalar-Vetham, the ‘Bible of the Cultivators of the soil.' 

Not only is it one of the text-books prescribed for the Oriental Honour School of this University, but it is moreover a chief subject of examination in the Madras University; and is taught, in some shape, in every vernacular school in the Tamil country. 

I have therefore in my official capacity prepared under some disadvantages, this edition, in the hope of bringing at least a few European minds into closer contact with those of our Tamil fellow-subjects; and of inducing young Tamil students to bring the freer and more invigorating, though more laborious methods of European study to bear upon their own great classics. 

A recent Tamil editor of the Naladi begins his preface with these words, "The Naladiyar is one of the moral text-books emanating from the (Madura) Academy, (சங்கம்) and, therefore, came into existence 4000 years ago!' 

He also gives, with slight variations, the current tradition regarding the 400 quatrains. It is briefly this : ‘Once on a time, 8000 Jain ascetics, driven by famine, came to a Pandiyan king and were supported by him. When the famine was over they prepared to return to their own country, though the king wished to retain the learned strangers who added lustre to his court. At last the poets were driven to depart secretly by night. In the morning it was found that each bard had left on his seat a quatrain. These were examined and found to differ widely from one another. The king then ordered them all to be thrown into the river Vaigai, when it was found that the palm-leaf scrolls containing these 400 quatrains ascended the river against the current, and came to the bank. To these the king gave the name of Naladiyar (the quatrainists).' Some other verses reached the banks at various spots, and are found in two collections, called 'Old sayings' (பழமொழி) and ‘The Essence of the way of virtue' (அறநெறிச்சாரம்). These atter works have never obtained the popularity enjoyed by the Naladiyar; and I should regard them as mainly imitations due to a later period, though some of the verses are certainly more or less ancient. 

These traditions point to a collection of popular verses made after the impalement of the Samanar (or Amanar - Jains, lit, 'naked ones'), perhaps in the time of Sundara Pandiyan (or Kun-Pandiyan), who probably lived in the twelfth centuryA.D. 

These verses, mainly but not, I think, exclusively of Jain origin, were doubtless expurgated by the Caivas, under whose chief guardianship Tamil literature has since remained. 

They were re-edited, interpreted, arranged, and forced into a kind of parallelism to the Kurral by Pathumanar (‘a lotus'), of whom nothing is really known. I have printed an elegant invocation ascribed to him. No other editor has done much for the quatrains. 

The fact that to them exclusively the title of Naladi (or quatrain) was given seems to render it probable that they constitute some of the earliest specimens of this elegant metre, the Alcaic of Tamil. 

As might be expected from their history, no consistent and developed system of philosophy, religion, or morals can be deduced from them; and it may be said with truth that these utterances have too little sequence and connexion to admit of any scientific criticism. Yet it is a kind of merit to put a happy point upon it commonplace; and these epigrams, drawn sometimes from Sanskrit sources and oftener forming the ground of ornate Sanskrit verses, written in imitation or rivalry, have become household words through all South India. 

I am unwilling to enter here on any discussion of the date of this and other Tamil classics, since there are scarcely any ascertained facts or ancient inscriptions from which to reason. The discussion of these matters requires aptitude, leisure, and opportunity for archaeological research (and these I do not possess), in addition to a critical acquaintance with Tamil literature. The want of this last essential has rendered many otherwise profound researches almost valueless. A very careful consideration of many masterpieces of Tamil literature leads me to think that between A. D. 800 and 1200 the greatest of these works were composed. Internal evidence, as far as I see, is all we have to rely on. 

Hiouen-Thsang, the Buddhist pilgrim who visited the continent of India in 640 A. D., says that in Malakuta the people were not much addicted to the cultivation of literature, and only valued the pursuit of wealth; and mentions Jains as the most prominent sect. Now, this Malukuta, must be Malakotta, Malainadu, Malaya, Malayalam, and seems to have included the whole Southern part of the Madras Presidency (Hultzsch, South-Indian Inscriptions, vol, ii part i, p. 2 note) : the Pandya and Cera Kingdoms. 

The Jains were great students and copyists of books (Burnell, S. I. Palaeography, p. 88). We may feel quite sure that the seventh century A. D., at the latest, saw the beginning of Tamil literature under Jain auspices. Perhaps the Jains fostered the vernaculars partly out of opposition to the Brahmans. Reformers and missionaries, who generally address themselves to the intelligent middle classes, have often been the most assiduous students and promoters of the vulgar tongues. Quatrain 243 of the Naladishows the feeling of hostility that existed between North and South : between Hindus and Jains. The great antiquity of Tamil, which is the one worthy rival of Sanskrit, is abundantly plain. 

The ancient grammatical works existing in Tamil, and its wonderful metrical system, prove its assiduous cultivation for long ages. An elaborate, scientific series of metres, such as Tamil glories in, adapted to every style and theme of composition, is the growth of centuries. Classical Tamil bears every mark of slow and natural evolution; but the subject is complicated by the number of works in circulation falsely attributed to old writers. The many really ridiculous forgeries of this kind bring discredit on all Tamil literature. Tamil scholars should banish, among other things, such spurious works as many of those attributed to Agastya, Avvai, Pattanattu-pillai, and others. 

There is no mention of God in the Naladi (save in the quite modern invocation) and no trace of religion. In this respect the quatrains differ from the Kurral. There are indeed a few poetical references to certain deities, and allusions to popular beliefs and rites, but the bards evidently were not orthodox Hindus. 

The misery of embodiment (பிறவி) in successive and infinitely varied forms, and the bliss of release (முத்தி) from all of these, are often expressed and illustrated with every kind of figure. It is assumed that always, to all, conscious existence on earth, as well as in any heavens or hells, is an absolute evil. Here, of course, we find ourselves in antagonism. 

Yet pervading these verses there seems to me to be a strong sense of moral obligation, an earnest aspiration after righteousness, a fervent and unselfish charity, and generally a loftiness of aim that are very impressive. I have felt sometimes as if there must be a blessing in store for a people that delight so utterly in compositions thus remarkably expressive of a hunger and thirst after righteousness. They are the foremost among the peoples of India, and the Kurral and Naladi have helped to make them so. 

It is in vain to discuss elaborately the origin and possible sources of the work. The majority of the verses were almost certainly sung by Jain ascetics, yet there are a few that seem to be from the Maha bharata, and undoubtedly many of the quartrains are fragments of the old ethical teaching which goes under the name of Niti-Castra. The history of south India permits us to expect to trace not only Buddhist, or Jain, but also Greek, Chiristian, and even Muhammadan influences in the early Tamil classics, as much almost as those inspired by Sanskrit writings. When we examine each quatrain as an artistic whole kind of cameo--we find that there are several distinct and clearly marked types. Some of these may be conveniently arranged in classes. 

1. 	There are the simply didactic. 
Here the student must first master the third and fourth lines, in which is enunciated the truth, precept, or principle, of which the former part of the quatrain gives the proof or illustration. This is a prevailing type also in the Kurral. A Venba verse, like a sonnet, should have a very effective and striking finish. 

This is seen in the first quatrain, where the aphorism is, 'worldly prosperity is a thing of no account’. 

This axiom is illustrated by a matter of daily experience. The connective is எனின் = 'if this is an undeniable fact, then.......,' Compare also 293. 

2. 	One class of the didactic quatrain depends for its effectiveness chiefly on some apt and ingenious simile, illustration, or analogy. To us some of these seem forced and fanciful conceits, but we really are not always in a position to judge or rightly estimate them. 

In 290 the aptness of the figure, the beauty of the expression, the wonderful terseness of the conclusion, together with the perfection of the form and rhythm, leave nothing to be desired. 

3. 	In some of these the simile is simply thrown in, while the most prominent thing is the clear enunciation of a truth. Here the whole runs on like rhetorical prose. Examples of this are 8, 49, 87. 

4. 	Some are cumulative, with or without a climax. 
Thus in 65 we find three statements, with a thread of connexion : 'It is the difficulty of the achievement that makes it meritorious.' In 80 we have three precepts. In 100 there is a climax. See 4, 55, 88. 

5. 	Others are enumerative, where the various parts and accessories of some idea are summed up. See 74, 81, 83, 34, 119. 

6. 	A few are antithetic, suggesting a contrast with or without a simile; as, 48, 51, 52, 89. 

7. 	A very few contain puns. So 39, 56. 
If I am not deceived there is in many of these verses something far beyond mere technical skill. At times by a few happy touches an idea is expressed in such apt language, and illuminated by such a picturesque use and adaptation of familiar words, each chosen with truest and most accurate discrimination, that the quatrain becomes a group of life-like pictures, on which the mind is fain to linger long, and to which it recurs often. In this matchless verse (135) —

கல்வி கரையில கற்பவர் நாள் சில 
மெல்ல நினைக்கிற் பிணிபல — தெள்ளிதின் 
ஆராய்ந் தமைவுடைய கற்பவே நீரொழியப் 
பாலுண் குருகிற் றெரிந்து. - 

not a syllable could be spared; while almost every word is common and easy, yet is the very fittest and is used in its exact meaning. It is somewhat archaic ;— has a fascinating air of mystery;—pleasantly exercises and amply rewards the student's ingenuity ;— seems dark at first, but once lit up, sparkles for ever. 

Thus கரை = shore suggests a metaphor: 'learning is the shoreless—infinite—ocean.' 

Then comes the simple antithesis, ‘the learners days are few’. In Tamil the use of the same root twice (in கல்வி and கற்பவர்) and again in the third line (கற்பவே) imparts an added charm. 

Into these perfectly (to Tamil ears) harmonious lines is compressed a whole chapter: 

‘The subjects of study (கல்வி with a plural verb) are infinitely numerous ; but the learners' days are few : and if it be calmly thought out, men are liable to many diseases. [பிணி = natural infirmities or “bonds," that enfeeble and restrict.] Youthful enthusiasm may lead men to anticipate great and varied triumphs ; calm reflection teaches them their natural weakness. So, men. should learn with discrimination (தெள்ளிது), examining closely (ஆராய்) things befitting (அமை, “suit, satisfy, gladden') them, with intelligence (தெரிந்து)  like that of the bird (the semi-divine Hansa), that drinks only the milk and leaves the water, when these mingled are presented to it. Of course this last is received as a fact! 

I have gratefully to acknowledge the liberal assistance of the Secretary of State for India in Council as formerly in the case of the Kurral. The Delegates of the Clarendon Press procured type especially for the book, and made the arrangements by which this Tamil classic is issued with a typograpical accuracy hardly ever attained in a similar work. To them my most grateful thanks are due. 

His Highness the Maharaja of Travancore has also subscribed liberally to the work. 

To the skill, patience, and unwearied zeal of Mr. Pembrey, Oriental reader at the Clarendon Press, it is mainly due that no table of errata is needed to a work so complicated and difficult. 

It will be seen that the editor and translator has sought carefully and patiently to interpret his authors, and has avoided all controversy. His aim in this work has been simply to introduce Tamil thoughts to English students. We need to understand one another and love one another, if we are to be of any mutual benefit. He who knows and loves 'sweet' Tamil may come to know and love those to whom it is so dear, and thus to be known and loved by them. 

Indian Institute, Oxford, 
February, 1893. 			G. U. Pope. 
-------------


உள்ளுறை - INDEX  
அதிகாரம் 
கடவுள் வாழ்த்து : Invocation 
பகுதி 1 - Part I     அறத்துப்பால் - On Virtue 
1. செல்வநிலையாமை : The Instability of Prosperity 
2. இளமை நிலையாமை : Youth Abides Not 
3. யாக்கை நிலையாமை : The Bodily Frame Endures Not 
4. அறன் வலியுறுத்தல் : The Might of Virtue 
5. தூய்தன்மை : Impurity 
6. துறவு : Renunciation 
7. சினமின்மை : The Absence of Anger : Meekness 
8. பொறையுடைமை : Patience 
9. பிறர் மனை நயவாமை : The Not Desiring Other Men's Wives 
10. ஈகை : Liberality 
11. பழவினை : Old Deeds 
12. மெய்ம்மை : Truth : Reality 
13. தீவினையச்சம் : Dread of Evil Deeds 

பகுதி 2 - Part II         பொருட்பால் - On Wealth 
14. கல்வி : Learning 
15. குடிப்பிறப்பு : High birth 
16. மேன்மக்கள் : Great Men 
17. பெரியாரைப் பிழையாமை : Avoidance of Offence to the Great 
18. நல்லினஞ்சேர்தல் : Association with the Good 
19. பெருமை : (Moral) Greatness 
20. தாளாண்மை : Preserving Energy 
21. சுற்றந் தழால் : The Support of Kindred 
22. நட்பாராய்தல் : Scrutiny in Forming Friendship 
23. நட்பிற் பிழை பொறுத்தல் : Bearing and Forbearing in Friendship
24. கூடா நட்பு : Unreal Friendship 
25. அறிவுடைமை : The Possession of Practical Wisdom 
26. அறிவின்மை : The Lack of Practical Wisdom 
27. நன்றியில் செல்வம் : Wealth that profits not 
28. ஈயாமை : Absence of Charity; or, the Miser 
29. இன்மை : Poverty 
30. மானம் : Honour (Self respect) 
31. இரவச்சம் : The Dread of Mendicancy 
32. அவையறிதல் The Knowledge of the Assembly 
33. புல்லறிவாண்மை : Insufficient Knowledge 
34. பேதைமை : Utter Folly 
35. கீழ்மை : Lowness
36. கயமை : Baseness 
37. பன்னெறி : Miscellaneous Topics 
38. பொதுமகளிர் : Wantons 
39. கற்புடை மகளிர் : Chaste Matronhood 

பகுதி 3 - Part III காமத்துப்பால் - On Love (or Pleasure) 
40. காமநுதலியல் : The Characteristics of Love 
F. W. Ellis' Translation of Some Quatrains 
பாட்டு முதற்குறிப்பு அகரவரிசை 
Glossary 
-------------

நாலடியார்  - ஆங்கில மொழிபெயர்ப்பு - போப் மற்றும் எல்லிஸ்
NALADIYAR --English Translation by Rev. Pope and Mr. Ellis 

கடவுள் வாழ்த்து 
(நேரிசை வெண்பா) 
வான்ஒடு வில்லின் வரவறியா வாய்மையால் 
கால்நிலம் தோயாக் கடவுளை - யாம்நிலம் 
சென்னி யுறவணங்கிச் சேர் தும்எம் உள்ளத்து 
முன்னி யவைமுடிக என்று. 

INVOCATION 
Knowing, like bow displayed in heav'n, man's advent here, 
To earth my head I bow, to God in truth draw near, 
Touch of whose foot earth never knew; thus what my mind 
Conceives, I pray may happy consummation find. 

This invocation is said to be by the Commentator Pathumanar. 


பகுதி 1. அறத்துப்பால்  /PART I. ON VIRTUE
அதிகாரம் 1. செல்வ நிலையாமை / Ch. 1. The Instability of Prosperity

1.இன்று செல்வராயிருப்பவர் நாளைப் பிச்சையெடுப்பவர் ஆவர் 
	அறுசுவை உண்டி அமர்ந்தில்லாள் ஊட்ட 
	மறுசிகை நீக்கிஉண் டாரும் — வறிஞராய்ச் 
	சென்றிரப்பர் ஓரிடத்துக் கூழ்எனின் செல்வம்ஒன் 
	றுண்டாக வைக்கற்பாற் றன்று. 
Who today dine luxuriously tomorrow beg 
Those who ate erewhile, course after course, food of six flavours, supplied by their complaisant spouse, now roam as paupers and beg a mess of pottage here and there; if so, let wealth be counted as a thing of nought! 

2.  செல்வம் நிலையாது. பகுத்துண்டு வாழ்க. 
	துகள்தீர் பெருஞ்செல்வம் தோன்றியக்கால் தொட்டுப் 
	பகடு நடந்தகூழ் பல்லாரோ டுண்க 
	அகடுற யார்மாட்டும் நில்லாது செல்வம் 
	சகடக்கால் போல வரும். 
Wealth abides not, share it and enjoy 
When you own ample wealth acquired by blameless means, with many sharing eat the grain that steers have trodden out! In centre poised prosperity stands with no man, but revolves like the waggon's wheel. 

3.  மன்னரும் தன் நிலை குலைந்து மாய்வர். 
	யானை யெருத்தம் பொலியக் குடைநிழற்கீழ்ச் 
	சேனைத் தலைவராய்ச் சென்றோரும் — ஏனை 
	வினைஉலப்ப வேறாகி வீழ்வர்தாம் கொண்ட 
	மனையாளை மாற்றார் கொள. 
Mighty warriors fall. 
Those who rode resplendent forth on the neck of an elephant, beneath the state umbrella's shade, as the leaders of the host, when 'other deeds' destroy, shallchange and fall, while foes lead away their wives as captives. 

4.பொருள்கள் தொலைகின்றன. சாவு வருகின்றது. 
	நின்றன நின்றன நில்லா எனஉணர்ந் 
	தொன்றின ஒன்றின வல்லே செயின்செய்க
	சென்றன சென்றன வாழ்நாள் செறுத்துடன் 
	வந்தது வந்தது கூற்று. 
Do your duty, knowing the instability of all things.Time flies! Death comes! 
The things of which you said, ‘they stand, they stand,' stand not; mark this, and perform what befits, yea! what befits, with all your power! Your days are gone, are gone! and death close pressing on is come, is come! 

5.  முன்னே அறஞ்செய்க. பின்னே சாவு வருகின்றது.
	என்னானும் ஒன்றுதம் கையுறப் பெற்றக்காற் 
	பின்னாவ தென்று பிடித்திரா — முன்னே 
	கொடுத்தார் உயப்போவர் கோடில்தீக் கூற்றம் 
	தொடுத்தாறு செல்லும் சுரம். 
Give before death comes. 
When you have gained and hold in hand any single thing, retain it not with the thought, ‘This will serve some other day!’ Those who have given betimes shall escape the desert road along which death, an unyielding foe, drags his captives away. 

6.  இறத்தல் திண்ணம். அறத்தைப் புரிக. 
	இழைத்தநாள் எல்லை இகவா பிழைத்தொரீஇக் 
	கூற்றம் குதித்துவந்தார் ஈங்கில்லை — ஆற்றப் 
	பெரும்பொருள் வைத்தீர் வழங்குமின் நாளைத் 
	தழீஇம்தழீஇம் தண்ணம் படும். 
Death inevitable. Hoard not ! 
Man's days pass not their assigned bound. None here on earth have ever escaped death's power, made off and got free. O hoarder of ample wealth, dispense it! On the morn the funeral drum will sound. 

7.மாய்வதை நீக்க மக்களால் முடியாது. 
	தோற்றம்சால் ஞாயிறு நாழியா வைகலும் 
	கூற்றம் அளந்துநும் நாளுண்ணும் — ஆற்ற 
	அறஞ்செய் தருளுடையீர் ஆகுமின் யாரும் 
	பிறந்தும் பிறவாதா ரில். 
Death inevitable. 
Death every day takes that fount of light the sun as a measure, metes out your days, and so devours.Do deeds of virtue full of kindly grace. Though all are born, none are exempt from death. 

8.  செல்வம் மேகத்து மின்னலைப் போன்றது. 
	செல்வர்யாம் என்று தாம் செல்வுழி எண்ணாத 
	புல்லறி வாளர் பெருஞ்செல்வம் — எல்லிற்
	கருங்கொண்மூ வாய்திறந்த மின்னுப்போல் தோன்றி 
	மருங்கறக் கெட்டு விடும். 
The wealth of the foolish like the lightning's flash. 
The ample wealth of men of mean understanding, who say, ' We're rich,' yet ponder not their path and end, appears, and perishes, and leaves no trace; like the flash, when the black thunder-cloud by night opens its mouth. 

9.  ஈயாதவன் பொருள் எல்லாம் இழப்பான் 
	உண்ணான் ஒளிநிறான் ஓங்குபுகழ் செய்யான் 
	துன்னரும் கேளிர் துயர்களையான் — கொன்னே 
	வழங்கான் பொருள்காத் திருப்பானேல் அஆ 
	இழந்தான்என் றெண்ணப் படும். 
The miser loses all. 
He eats not, sheds no light of splendour around, performs no deeds that merit lofty praise, soothes no sorrow that choice friends feel, spends nought, but hoards his wealth in vain : “Aha! he's lost it all,' shall men pronounce. 

10.  ஒன்றும் ஈயாதவன் தேனீயை யொப்பான். 
	உடாஅதும் உண்ணாதும் தம்உடம்பு செற்றும் 
	கெடாஅத நல்லறமும் செய்யார் — கொடாஅது 
	வைத்தீட்டினார்இழப்பர் வான்தோய் மலைநாட 
	உய்த்தீட்டும் தேனீக் கரி. 	
The miser like the honey-bee. 
Those who stint in clothes and food, and mortify their bodies, yet do not deeds of deathless virtue, and bestow nothing, hoarding shall suffer loss:— Lord of the cloud-capped hills !--this the hoarding honey-bee attests. 
---------

2. இளமை நிலையாமை /  Ch. 2. Youth Abides Not

11.இளமையில் ஒழுக்கமுடன் வாழ்க. முதுமை வருவது உறுதி. 
	நரைவரும் என்றெண்ணி நல்லறி வாளர் 
	குழவி யிடத்தே துறந்தார் - புரைதீரா 
	மன்னா இளமை மகிழ்ந்தாரே கோல்ஊன்றி 
	இன்னாங் கெழுந்திருப் பார். 
Age will come. Be wise early 
"Grey eld will come,’—the wise remembering this renounce the world even in tender age; but they who joy in youth, unstable, never free from fault, shall erewhile painfully rise up leaning on a staff. 

12.  எல்லாம் நிலையில்லாதன. 
	நட்புநார் அற்றன நல்லாரும் அஃகினார் 
	அற்புத் தளையும் அவிழ்ந்தன — உட்காணாய் 
	வாழ்தலின் ஊதியம் என்னுண்டாம் வந்ததே 
	ஆழ்கலத் தன்ன கலி. 
All is vanity. 
Served are the ties of friendship; minished are the  pleasant ones; love's bonds are loosened too; then look within and say, what profit is there in this joyous life of thine ? The cry comes up as from a sinking ship! 

13.  மனிதர்க்கு மூப்புப்பருவம் அழகைக் கெடுக்கும். 
	சொல்தளர்ந்து கோல்ஊன்றிச் சோர்ந்த நடையினராய்ப் 
	பல்கழன்று பண்டம் பழிகாறும் - இல்செறிந்து 
	காம நெறிபடரும் கண்ணினார்க் கில்லையே 
	ஏம நெறிபடரு மாறு. 
Men are loath to give up bodily pleasures. 
Speech falters, they lean on a staff, and walk tottering, their teeth fall out; yet, till the vessel (the body) is scorned by all, they linger in the house, still indulging fond desires; to these no way of safety opens out. 

14.  இளமையில் நும் மனையாள் எழில் பாராட்டினீர். 
	தாழாத் தளராத் தலைநடுங்காத் தண்டுன்றா 
	வீழா இறக்கும் இவள்மாட்டும் — காழிலா 
	மம்மர்கொள் மாந்தர்க் கணங்காகுந் தன்கைக்கோல் 
	அம்மனைக்கோ லாகிய ஞான்று. 
The cherished wife of your youth. 
To men that cherish weak desire for her that's doomed to droop and fail, supporting her palsied limbs with a staff, and then to fall and pass away, what anguish comes, when she grasps in her hands the staff her mother held! 

15.  தலைமுறை தலைமுறையாக இறப்பும் பிறப்பும் தொடர்ந்து வருகின்றன. 
	எனக்குத்தாயாகியாள் என்னைஈங் கிட்டுத் 
	தனக்குத்தாய் நாடியே சென்றாள் — தனக்குத்தாய் 
	ஆகி யவளும் அதுவானால் தாய்த்தாய்க்கொண் 
	டேகும் அளித்திவ் வுலகு. 
Endless series of successive generations. 
My mother bare me, left me here, and went to seek her mother, who in the selfsame manner has gone in search; and thus in ceaseless round goes on the mother-quest. Such is the grace this world affords ! 

16.  பலியிடும் ஆடு இலையுண்டு மகிழ்வது போன்றது வாழ்வு. 
	வெறிஅயர் வெங்களத்து வேல்மகன் பாணி 
	முறியார் நறுங்கண்ணி முன்னர்த் தயங்க 
	மறிகுளகு உண்டன்ன மன்னா மகிழ்ச்சி 
	அறிவுடை யாளர்கண் இல். 
The lamb before the sacrificer. 
The lamb in the ruddy slaughter-house will crop the fragrant shoots that dangle from the garland in the slayer's hand; such transient gladness of the thoughtless, youthful hour is never found amid the wise. 

17.  பழுத்த பழம் மட்டும் உதிராது. இளமையிலும் மனிதர் இறப்பர். 
	பனிபடு சோலைப் பயன்மர மெல்லாம் 
	கனிஉதிர்ந்து வீழ்ந்தற் றிளமை — நனிபெரிதும் 
	வேற்கண்ணள் என்றிவளை வெஃகன்மின் மற்றிவளும் 
	கோற்கண்ண ளாகும் குனிந்து. 
Fruit only ripens to fall. Youth leads to decay. 
The sweet fruit from every tree that bears in the dewy grove must fall to earth. Thus youth decays. Desire not her whose eyes gleam bright as darts. Full soon she too will walk bent down, with a staff to aid her dim sight. 

18.  என் உடல் நலம் மேலும் மேலும் மாறிவரும். ஒரு நிலையில்லாதது. 
	பருவம் எனைத்துள பல்லின்பால் ஏனை 
	இருசிகையும் உண்டீரோ என்று—வரிசையால் 
	உள்நாட்டம் கொள்ளப் படுதலால் யாக்கைக்கோள் 
	எண்ணார் அறிவுடை யார். 
Constant anxieties about health. 
’How old are you ?' 'How last your teeth ?' and, ‘Do you eat two courses yet?' men ask with kindly courtesy. By such close questions urged, the wise will learn to judge the body as a thing of nought.

19. நாளைக் கடத்தாது நல்வினை செய் 
	மற்றறிவாம் நல்வினை யாம்இளையம் என்னாது 
	கைத்துண்டாம் போழ்தே கரவா தறஞ்செய்ம்மின் 
	முற்றி யிருந்த கனியொழியத் தீவளியால் 
	நற்காய் உதிர்தலும் உண்டு. 	
Against Procrastination. 
Say not, 'in after time we'll learn virtue, we're young;' but while wealth is yours conceal it not; do virtuous deeds. When evil tempests rage, not the ripe fruit alone, but the unripe fruit's fair promise also falls. 

20.தாய் அலறப் பிள்ளையைக் கூற்றுவன் கொல்கிறான். 
	ஆள்பார்த் துழலும் அருளில்கூற் றுண்மையால் 
	தோள்கோப்புக் காலத்தால் கொண்டுய்ம்மின் —பீள்பிதுக்கிப் 
	பிள்ளையைத் தாய்அலறக் கோடலால் மற்றதன் 
	கள்ளம் கடைப்பிடித்தல் நன்று. 
The infant slain by death. 
Relentless death is roaming round, and eyes his man! 'Tis true. Take up your wallet, scape betimes. He bears away the new-born babe, while the mother sorely laments. It is good to bear in mind his guile. 
--------

3. யாக்கை நிலையாமை / Ch. 3. The Bodily Frame Endures Not

21.  வலிமையுடைய மன்னரும் மண்மேல் மடிவார். 
மலைமிசைத் தோன்றும் மதியம் போல் யானைத் 
தலைமிசைக் கொண்ட குடையர் — நிலமிசைத் 
துஞ்சினார் என்றெடுத்துத் தூற்றப்பட் டாரல்லால் 
எஞ்சினார் இவ்வுலகத் தில். 
Mighty kings die. 
Even kings that rode on elephants beneath the state umbrella's shade, like the moon appearing over some bill, have had their names proclaimed on earth as dead ;— not any in this world have escaped. 

22.  வாழ் நாள் பறந்தோடுகின்றது. மக்கட்பிறப்பிற்குரிய பயனை நாடுக.
வாழ்நாட் கலகா வயங்கொளி மண்டிலம் 
வீழ்நாள் படாஅ தெழுதலால் — வாழ்நாள் 
உலவாமுன் ஒப்புர வாற்றுமின் யாரும் 
நிலவார் நிலமிசை மேல். 
Time is fleeting,—use it
As the measure of your days the shining orb each day unfailing rises; so before your joyous days have passed away, perform ye 'fitting deeds of grace'; for none abide on earth. 

23.  உலகில் துன்பமும் இன்பமும் மாறி மாறி வரும். 
மன்றம் கறங்க மணப்பறை யாயின 
அன்றவர்க் காங்கே பிணப்பறையாய்ப் — பின்றை 
ஒலித்தலும் உண்டாம்என் றுய்ந்துபோம் ஆறே 
வலிக்குமாம் மாண்டார் மனம். 
Mutability of earthly joys. 
The marriage drums that sounded out in the festive hall, there and that very day have served for him as funeral drums! Men of lofty minds will note that thus it haps, and will strive to gain the way to escape. 

24. இறந்தபின் பறை கொட்டும் இயல்பு. 
சென்றே எறிப ஒருகால் சிறுவரை 
நின்றே எறிப பறையினை — நன்றேகாண் 
முக்காலைக் கொட்டினுள் மூடித்தீக் கொண்டெழுவர் 
செத்தாரைச் சாவார் சுமந்து. 
The funeral. 
They march and then strike once! A little while they wait, then strike the drum a second time. Behold, how fine! The third stroke sounds. They veil it, take the fire, and go forth :—the dying bear the deed! 

25. மக்கள் வாழ்வில் இன்பம் இல்லையென்று சாப்பறை சாற்றுகின்றது. 
கணம் கொண்டு சுற்றத்தார் கல்லென் றலறப் (டீண் 
பிணம்கொண்டு காட்டுய்ப்பார்க் கண்டும் - மணங்கொண் 
டுண்டுண்டுண் டென்னும் உணர்வினாற் சாற்றுமே 
டொண்டொண்டொ டென்னும் பறை. 
Death pours contempt on human joys. 
To him, who, although he sees them bear the corpse  to the burning ground, while friends in troops loudly lament, boldly asserts that wedded life is bliss on earth, the funeral drum speaks out, and mocks his vain utterance. 

26.  உயிர் பிரிந்தபின் உடம்பைப் போற்றுவது அறியாமை. 
நார்த்தொடுத் தீர்க்கிலென் நன்றாய்ந் தடக்கிலென் 
பார்த்துழிப் பெய்யிலென் பல்லோர் பழிக்கிலென் 
தோற்பையுள் நின்று தொழிலறச் செய்தூட்டும் 
கூத்தன் புறப்பட்டக் கால். 
The dead body 
When the 'soul', that, taking its stand in this skin clad frame, has fully wrought its works, and partaken of life's experiences, has gone forth, what matters it whether you attach ropes to the body and drag it away, or carefully bury it, or throw it aside in any place you light upon, or if many revile the departed ? 

27.  நீர்க்குமிழிபோல நில்லாது உடல்.
படுமழை மொக்குளில் பல்காலும் தோன்றிக் 
கெடுமிதோர் யாக்கையென் றெண்ணித் - தடுமாற்றம் 
தீர்ப்பேம்யாம் என்றுணரும் திண்ணறி வாளரை 
நேர்ப்பார்யார் நீள்நிலத்தின் மேல். 
The body a bubble 
'Like a bubble, that in pelting rain appears full oft, and disappears, is this our frame.' So sages have judged, steadfast in wisdom, and have decided to end this dubious strife. On this wide earth who equal these? 

28.  மலையிற் படரும் மஞ்சுபோல் மறையும் உடல். 
யாக்கையை யாப்புடைத்தாப் பெற்றவர் தாம்பெற்ற 
யாக்கையா லாய பயன்கொள்க — யாக்கை 
மலையாடு மஞ்சுபோல் தோன்றிமற் றாங்கே 
நிலையாது நீத்து விடும். 
The body like a cloud on the hillside. 
Those who've gained and held fast by this well-knit  frame (a human body) should take the gain the body they have gained is intended to yield. Like a cloud that wanders over the hills, the body here appears, and abiding not, departs leaving no trace behind.

29. புல்நுனிப் பனிபோல் உடல் விழும்
புல்நுனிமேல் நீர்போல் நிலையாமை என்றெண்ணி 
இன்னினியே செய்க அறவினை — இன்னினியே 
நின்றான் இருந்தான் கிடந்தான்தன் கேள்அலறச் 
சென்றான் எனப்படுத லால். 
The body like dew on the tip of a blade of grass. 
Considering that all things are transient as the dew-drop on the tip of a blade of grass, now, now at once, do virtuous deeds! "Even now he stood, he sat, he fell—while his kindred cried aloud he died :' such is man's history! 

30.  சுற்றத்தார் சூழ்ந்த தொடர்பு நிலையன்று. 
கேளாதே வந்து கிளைகளாய் இல்தோன்றி 
வாளாதே போவரால் மாந்தர்கள் — வாளாதே 
சேக்கை மரன்ஒழியச் சேண்நீங்கு புள்போல 
யாக்கை தமர்க்கொழிய நீத்து. 
All human relationships merely temporary. 
Unasked men come, appear in the home as kinsmen, and then silently go. As the bird silently deserts the tree where its nest yet remains, and goes far off, so these leave but their body to their friends. 
-----------

4.  அறன்வலி யுறுத்தல் / Ch. 4. The Might of Virtue

31.  பிச்சைக்காரர் பிறர்வாசல் நிற்பார் 
அகத்தாரே வாழ்வார்என் றண்ணாந்து நோக்கிப் 
புகத்தாம் பெறாஅர் புறங்கடை பற்றி 
மிகத்தாம் வருந்தி இருப்பாரே மேலைத் 
தவத்தால் தவஞ்செய்யா தார். 
The door closed. Too late. 
‘Yet those within are blest,' so saying, they look up, but obtain no entrance: their place is at the outer gate. There will they suffer much, who thro' lack of former penitence do no penance now. [In a former state penance won for them a human shape. As men they have now failed.] 

32.  வாழ்நாள் கழியும். வருந்தி அறம் செய். 
ஆவாநாம் ஆக்கம் நசைஇ அறம்மறந்து 
போவா நாம் என்னாப் புலைநெஞ்சே — ஓவாது 
நின்றுஞற்றி வாழ்தி எனினும்நின் வாழ்நாள்கள் 
சென்றன செய்வ துரை. 
What wilt thou do in the end thereof? 
Say not, O silly soul, we will live desiring wealth and die forgetting virtue! We'll say that ceaselessly toiling thou shalt live long; but tell me, what wilt thou do when all thy happy days are over? 

33.  வினைப்பயன் துன்பமாய் விளைவது என்றறிக. 
வினைப்பயன் வந்தக்கால் வெய்ய உயிரா 
மனத்தின் அழியுமாம் பேதை - நினைத்ததனைத் 
தொல்லைய தென்றுணர் வாரே தடுமாற்றத் 
தெல்லை இகந்தொருவு வார். 
The wise accept the sorrows of life as retributive. 
When the ‘fruit of deeds' is come, the fool sighs heavily, and all his soul dies out; but those who reflect and say, ,'Tis old desert,' will pass beyond the bound of life's perplexity, and escape (by devoting themselves to virtue). 

34.  பிறப்பின் பயன் அறத்தைப் புரிவதே. 
அரும்பெறல் யாக்கையைப் பெற்ற பயத்தால்
பெரும்பயனும் ஆற்றவே கொள்க — கரும்பூர்ந்த 
சாறுபோல் சாலவும் பின்உதவி மற்றதன் 
கோதுபோல் போகும் உடம்பு. 
Virtue is the gain. The body mere refuse. 
As the gain from the mortal frame now reached —and which is so hard to reach —with all thy might lay hold of virtue's lasting good. As the juice expressed from the sugar-cane 'twill afterwards be thine aid, when the body goes like refuse flung away. 

35.  அறப்பயன் அடைந்தோர் இறப்பதற்கு அஞ்சார். 
கரும்பாட்டிக் கட்டி சிறுகாலைக் கொண்டார் 
துரும்பெழுந்து வேம்கால் துயராண் டுழவார் 
வருந்தி உடம்பின் பயன்கொண்டார் கூற்றம் 
வருங்கால் பரிவ திலர். 
The same. The body only sapless stalks. 
Those who have pressed the sugar-cane, and early taken the juice, when the refuse heaped up burns, will suffer no grief: those who have toiled and gained the fruit won from embodied existence will feel no pangs when death shall come. 

36.   சாவு நெருங்கியது தர்மம் புரிக. 
இன்றுகொல் அன்றுகொல் என்றுகொல் என்னாது 
பின்றையே நின்றது கூற்றமென் றெண்ணி 
ஒருவுமின் தீயவை ஒல்லும் வகையால் 
மருவுமின் மாண்டார் அறம். 
Death stands waiting behind you. Delay not! 
‘This day ?’ That day? What day? O question not the time! Bethink you death stands behind you ever waiting! Put from you every evil thing; and with all your powers embrace the virtue which sages teach. 

37. உயிர்கட்குறுதி நல்வினை ஒன்றே. 
மக்களா லாய பெரும்பயனும் ஆயுங்கால் 
எத்துணையும் ஆற்றப் பலவானால் — தொக்க 
உடம்பிற்கே ஒப்புரவு செய்தொழுகா தும்பர்க் 
கிடந்துண்ணப் பண்ணப் படும். 
Use the body to gain the world to come. 
When you examine closely the mighty gains to be acquired by birth in a human shape, if they seem manifold, perform not deeds which suit the body's frame alone, but deeds whose fruit is joy in the world to come! 

38.  தக்கார்க்கு உதவுவது மிக்க பயன் விளைக்கும். 
உறக்கும் துணையதோர் ஆலம்வித் தீண்டி 
இறப்ப நிழல்பயந் தாஅங்கு — அறப்பயனும் 
தான் சிறிதாயினும் தக்கார்கைப் பட்டக்கால் 
வான்சிறிதாப் போர்த்து விடும். 
A benefit conferred by the worthy on the worthy. 
The banyan seed, though it be minute as one might see in dreams, grows to a mighty tree of amplest shade; so gifts from a virtuous hand, received by a worthy hand, though small, will hide the diminish'd heavens. 

39.  வாழ்நாள் கழிவது கண்டு வருந்துக. 
வைகலும் வைகல் வரக்கண்டும் அஃதுணரார் 
வைகலும் வைகலை வைகுமென் றின்புறுவர் 
வைகலும் வைகல்தம் வாழ்நாள்மேல் வைத்தல் 
வைகலை வைத்துணரா தார். 
Days pass. 
Daily they see the passing day added to the sum of the days gone by, as a day that is spent from out the store of their days, yet daily, as they see day dawn, they say joyously, 'This day will abide with us till the close of day?’

40.  இரந்துயிர் வாழ்வதை இழிவுஎன விடுக. 
மான அருங்கலம் நீக்கி இரவென்னும் 
ஈன இளிவினால் வாழ்வேன்மன் — ஈனத்தால் 
ஊட்டியக் கண்ணும் உறுதிசேர்ந் திவ்வுடம்பு 
நீட்டித்து நிற்கும் எனின். 
Why should man maintain the perishable body by dishonourable begging ? 
Parting with honour's jewel I might still consent to live a suppliant's life of shame, if when maintained by such disgrace, this body could abide in strength and last for length of days. 
--------------

5.  தூய்தன்மை  / Ch. 5. Impurity 

41.  மேற்றோல் நீங்கினால் நாற்றமாம் உடம்பு. 
மாக்கேழ் மடநல்லாய் என்றரற்றும் சான்றவர் 
நோக்கார்கொல் நொய்யதோர் புக்கிலை[#]— யாக்கைக்கோர் 
ஈச்சிற கன்னதோர் தோல்அறினும் வேண்டுமே 
காக்கை கடிவதோர் கோல். 
Any slight wound may fester, and reduce the fairest form to a loathsome state. 
‘O gentle maiden, fair and good !' These paragons that thus rave, know they not 'the heavenly home invisible?’ Let a bit of skin be broken slight as an insect's wing, and you need the stick that drives a way the crows !  
[#] (பாடம்) துச்சிலை. 

42.  மாதர் உடல் கண்டு மயங்கல் ஆகாது. 
தோற்போர்வை மேலும் தொளைபலவாய்ப் பொய்ம்மறைக்கு 
மீப்போர்வை மாட்சித் துடம்பானால் — மீப்போர்வை 
பொய்ம்மறையாக் காமம் புகலாது மற்றதனைப் 
பைம்மறியாப் பார்க்கப் படும். 
The body's beauty only skin - deep. 
If the body which, with a covering of skin above, possesses many apertures, owes its beauty only to that outward cloak that veils the false (the inner foulness), then is it fitting to say no word of lustful desire which hides the false from itself by the covering veil, but to regard that body as an undeveloped embryo. 

43.  ஒப்பனையால் உடல் அழுக்கு நீங்காது. 
தக்கோலம் தின்று தலை நிறையப் பூச்சூடிப் 
பொய்க்கோலம் செய்ய ஒழியுமே — எக்காலும் 
உண்டி வினையுள் உறைக்கும் எனப்பெரியோர் 
கண்டுகை விட்ட மயல். 
Outward adornment is not inward purification. 
Will impurity ever cease from the worthless body which the great have abandoned, knowing it to be reeking with odours from processes connected with nutrition, though aromatics be chewed, the head covered with garlands, and the body adornedwith false splendour? 

44.  கற்றோர் பெண்களின் கண்கண்டு மயங்கார் 
தெண்ணீர்க் குவளை பொருகயல் வேல்என்று 
கண்ணில்புன் மாக்கள் கவற்ற விடுவேனோ 
உண்ணீர் களைந்தக்கால் நுங்குசூன் றிட்டன்ன 
கண்ணீர்மை கண்டொழுகு வேன். 
Female eyes shall not bewilder me ! 
Shall I abandon (my ascetic purpose) because blind, low men worry me, saying (that woman's eye is like) the water-lily in the clear stream, or the warring carp, or a javelin? I will pursue my virtuous way as having seen (that) the eye's real nature (is), like (that of) the palm-tree fruit (which is) scooped out, after the water has been drained off! 

45.  மங்கையர் பல்லெழிலில் மயங்குவர் அறிவிலார். 
முல்லை முகைமுறுவல் முத்தென் றிவைபிதற்றும் 
கல்லாப்புன் மாக்கள் கவற்ற விடுவேனோ 
எல்லாருங் காணப் புறங்காட் டுதிர்ந்துக்க 
பல்லென்பு கண்டொழுகு வேன். 
The beauty of women's teeth shall not bewilder me. 
Though worthless men untaught should fret my soul and rave of teeth like jasmine buds and pearls, shall I forego my fixed resolve, who have seen in the burning ground those bones—the fallen teeth —strewn round for all to see ? 

46.  குடர்முதல் உறுப்புக்கள் கூடியது உடம்பு. 
குடரும் கொழுவும் குருதியும் என்புந்
தொடரும் நரம்பொடு தோலும் — இடையிடையே 
வைத்த தடியும் வலம்புமாம் மற்றிவற்றுள் 
எத்திறத்தாள் ஈர்ங்கோதை யாள். 
'This vile body.'
 (The body) is entrails, and marrow, and blood, and bone, and connecting tendons, and skin, and here and there flesh interposed, and fat. In the midst of these, what sort of a being is she who wears the fresh garlands? 

47.  மங்கையர் மேல் அழகு மையலை விளைக்கும். 
ஊறி உவர்த்தக்க ஒன்பது வாய்ப்புலனும் 
கோதிக் குழம்பலைக்கும் கும்பத்தைப் —பேதை 
பெருந்தோளி பெய்வளாய் என்னுமீப் போர்த்த 
கருந்தோலால் கண்விளக்கப் பட்டு. 
The body disgusting. 
The fool will address the earthen pot (the body), from which defilement oozes, which from nine disgusting outlets scatters pollution, and in which slimy liquids move to and fro—and say, 'O thou of the rounded arms,' ‘O thou with armlets decked, ‘—because it is made bright to his eyes by a covering of black skin. 

48.  சந்தனம் பூஉடல் சார்த்தினும் பயனிலை. 
பண்டம் அறியார் படுசாந்தும் கோதையும் 
[#]கொண்டுபாராட்டுவார் கண்டிலர்கொல் - மண்டிப் 
பெடைச்சேவல் வன்கழுகு பேர்த்திட்டுக் குத்தும்[§]
முடைச்சாகா டச்சிற் றுழி . 
The body a prey to corruption. 
They know not what the body is; with sandal paste and flowers they make it fine. Have they not seen, I pray, the vultures and their mates in flocks with busy beaks devour the body foul when the chariot-axle is snapt? 
[#] (பாடம்) கண்டு.     [§]குத்தன்.

49.  வாழ்வின் இழிவை மண்டையோடு காட்டும். 
கழிந்தார் இடுதலை கண்டார்நெஞ் சுட்கக் 
குழிந்தாழ்ந்த கண்ணவாய்த் தோன்றி — ஒழிந்தாரைப் 
போற்றி நெறிநின்மின் இற்றிதன் பண்பென்று 
சாற்றுங்கொல் சாலச் சிரித்து. 
The eyeless skulls teach. 
The skulls of the dead, at the sight of which the gazer fears, with deep cavernous eyes appear, and grinning say to those who still survive, 'Guard well! In virtue's path stand fast. This is the body's grace and worth.'' 

50.  இடுகாட்டு வெண்டலை நம் இறுமாப்பு நீக்கும் 
உயிர்போயார் வெண்டலை உட்கச் சிரித்துச் 
செயிர்தீர்க்கும் செம்மாப் பவரைச் — செயிர்தீர்ந்தார் 
கண்டிற் றிதன்வண்ணம் என்பதனால் தம்மையோர் 
பண்டத்துள் வைப்பதிலர். 
The sight of the skulls cures pride. 
The skulls of the dead, grinning so as to excite disgust, cure the vain lovers of life of their folly. Those who are cured of this folly, seeing (the skulls in the burning ground), say “such is this body,' and so value themselves as nothing. 
--------------

6.  துறவு   / Ch. 6. Renunciation  

51.  தவத்தின்முன் பாவம் நில்லாது. 
விளக்குப் புகஇருள் மாய்ந்தாங் கொருவன் 
தவத்தின்முன் நில்லாதாம் பாவம் — விளக்கு நெய் 
தேய்விடத்துச் சென்றிருள் பாய்ந்தாங்கு நல்வினை 
தீர்விடத்து நிற்குமாம் தீது. 
Penitence puts sin to flight. 
As when a lamp enters darkness dies, so sin stands not before man's penitence. As, when in a lamp the oil wastes, darkness rushes in, so evil takes its stand where deeds of virtue cease. 

52. கணிதம் இலக்கணம் கற்பதிற் பயனில்லை. கடமை செய்க.
நிலையாமை நோய்மூப்புச் சாக்காடென் றெண்ணித் 
தலையாயார் தங்கருமஞ் செய்வார் — தொலைவில்லாச் 
சத்தமும் சோதிடமும் என்றாங் கிவைபிதற்றும் 
பித்தரின் பேதையார் இல். 
Put away useless studies. 
The chief of men reflect on change, disease, old age, and death, and do their needful work. Those who raving teach the endless round of sevenfold science, and the lore of stars, are maddest of the foolish throng. 

53.  எல்லாப் பொருள்களும் நில்லா வுலகில். 
இல்லம் இளமை எழில்வனப்பு மீக்கூற்றம் 
செல்வம் வலிஎன் றிவையெல்லாம் — மெல்ல 
நிலையாமை கண்டு நெடியார் துறப்பர் 
தலையாயார் தாம்உய்யக் கொண்டு. 
Renunciation at once. 
The chief of men in quite thought discern how house, and youth, and beauty's grace, and high estate, and wealth, and strength, all pass away; and thus, to save themselves, prolonging not the time, renounce all these. 

54.  துன்பவாழ்வு இதுவென்று துறப்பர் மேலோர். 
துன்பம் பலநாள் உழந்தும் ஒருநாளை 
இன்பமே காமுறுவர் ஏழையார் — இன்பம் 
இடைதெரிந் தின்னாமை நோக்கி மனையா 
றடைவொழிந்தார் ஆன்றமைந் தார். 
Pleasure and pain. 
Though wretched men suffer afflictions many a day, yet one day's delight they eagerly desire. The men of calm and full wisdom, in pleasure's core see pain, and quit the pleasant household paths. 

55.  மூப்புநோய் வருவதன் முன்துறவு பேணுக. 
கொன்னே கழிந்தன் றிளமையும் இன்னே 
பிணியொடு மூப்பும் வருமால் — துணிவொன்றி 
என்னொடு சூழா தெழுநெஞ்சே போதியோ 
நன்னெறி சேர நமக்கு. 
Unreflecting soul, why not seek the way of peace? 
In vain is my youth spent. Even now disease and old age will come. O soul ! be bold; wrangle no more with me, but rise! Wilt thou not go where both thou and I may gain virtue's path? 

56.  வறுமை குறித்தேனும் துறவு கொள்க . 
மாண்ட குணத்தோடு மக்கட்பேறில்லெனினும் 
பூண்டான் கழித்தற் கருமையால் — பூண்ட 
மிடிஎன்னும் காரணத்தின் மேன்முறைக் கண்ணே 
கடிஎன்றார் கற்றறிந் தார். 
Marriage to be dreaded. 
Though your wife possess no excellence and bear no child, it is hard to get rid of the marriage bond. For this cause since he who weds puts sorrow on, in olden days the learned made marriage a synonym of dread. 

57.  துன்பம் பொறுத்துத் துறவு மேற்கொள்க. 
ஊக்கித்தாம் கொண்ட விரதங்கள் உள்ளுடையத் 
தாக்கருந் துன்பங்கள் தாம்தலை வந்தக்கால் 
நீக்கி நிறூஉம் உரவோரே நல்லொழுக்கம் 
காக்கும் திருவத் தவர். 
Patience and perseverance. 
When troubles arise, hard to resist, to cause them to break the vows which their lofty spirits have pledged, the men of power set griefs aside and firmly fix their souls in right. These are the blessed, guarding decorum's rule. 

58.  தம்மை இகழ்ந்தாலும் பொறுப்பதுதான் தவம். 
தம்மை இகழ்ந்தமை தாம்போறுப்ப தன்றிமற் 
றெம்மை இகழ்ந்த வினைப்பயத்தால் — உம்மை 
எரிவாய் நிரயத்து வீழ்வர்கொல் என்று 
பரிவதூஉம் சான்றோர் கடன். 
Forbearance and pity for evil-doers. 
To bear with those that speak contemptuous words; yea, more, to say, 'Ah, will these sink in the other world to hell, the place of fire, as fruit of their contemptuous words;' and to grieve, is duty of the perfect man. 

59.  ஐம்புலன் அடக்கினோர் முத்தியை யடைவார். 
மெய்வாய்கண் மூக்குச் செவியெனப் பேர்பெற்ற 
ஐவாய வேட்கை அவாவினைக் — கைவாய் 
கலங்காமற் காத்துய்க்கும் ஆற்றலுடையான் 
விலங்காது வீடு பெறும். 
Repression of sensuous emotions. 
He who undisturbed, in the ordered way of right, has power to guard and guide the desires and lusts that find entrance by the five sense-gates, called 'body, mouth, eye, nose, and ear' - unfailing shall gain 'release.' 

60.  துன்பங் கண்டு துறப்பார் மேலோர். 
துன்பமே மீதூரக் கண்டும் துறவுள்ளார் 
இன்பமே காமுறுவர் ஏழையார் — இன்மம் 
இசைதொறும் மற்றதன் இன்னாமை நோக்கிப் 
பசைதல் பரியாதாம் மேல். 
The bitter pleasures of life. 
Though wretched men behold afflictions urge and press, renunciation is not in their thoughts; delight they eagerly desire. The great in every joy behold its pain, and seek it not. 
-----

7. சினமின்மை  / Ch. 7. The Absence of Anger : Meekness  

61.  மதித்தாலும் இகழ்ந்தாலும் மனங்கொள்ளார் மேலோர். 
மதித்திறப் பாரும் இறக்க மதியா 
மிதித்திறப் பாரும் இறக்க - மிதித்தேறி 
ஈயும் தலைமேல் இருத்தலால் அஃதறிவார் 
காயும் கதமின்மை நன்று. 
Disregard of the esteem or disesteem of men. 
Who pass esteeming us, let them pass on! And those who contemn and trample on us as they pass, let them too pass on! If even a fly (especially unclean) should climb, trampling on their head, it is well that the wise who know its worth, should feel no wrath. 

62.  கோபம் வரினும் பொறுமை கொள்க. 
தண்டாச் சிறப்பின்தம் இன்னுயிரைத் தாங்காது
கண்டுழி யெல்லாம் துறப்பவோ — மண்டி 
அடிபெயரா தாற்ற இளிவந்த போழ்தின் 
முடிகிற்கும் உள்ளத் தவர். 
Resolute men bear meekly the evils of life. 
Although disgraces throng thickly, and may not be repulsed, will those whose minds are set upon finishing the work begun, renounce sweet life's unfailing worth in their impatience, whenever they see (evils)? 

63.  பழித்துரைப்போரையும் பழியார் அறிஞர். 
காவா தொருவன்தன் வாய்திறந்து சொல்லும்சொல் 
ஓவாதே தன்னைச் சுடுதலால் –- ஓவாதே
ஆய்ந்தமைந்த கேள்வி அறிவுடையார் எஞ்ஞான்றும் 
காய்ந்தமைந்த சொல்லார் கறுத்து. 
Rashness in speech hurts one's self. 
If a man open his mouth and speak unguarded words, his words will ceaselessly burn his soul. The wise who ceaselessly hear, and ponder well and calmly, even in their wrath, will never give utterance to words of fire. 

64.  கீழ்மக்கள் கோபம் மேன்மேற் கிளர்ந்து எழும். 
நேர்த்து நிகரல்லார் நீரல்ல சொல்லியக்கால்
வேர்த்து வெகுளார் விழுமியோர் - ஓர்த்ததனை 
உள்ளத்தான் உள்ளி உரைத்துராய் ஊர்கேட்பத் 
துள்ளித்தூண் முட்டுமாம் கீழ். 
The good man's meekness. The low man's ungoverned fury. 
When men who are beneath them confront them, and speak unseemly words, the excellent wax not hot with anger. The base man will brood over it, chafe and rave for all the town to hear, and leap, and dash his head against a post. 

65.  இளையான் அடக்கம், இல்லான் கொடை, வலியவன் பொறுமை மூன்றும் சிறந்தன. 
இளையான் அடக்கம் அடக்கம் கிளைபொருள்
இல்லான் கொடையே கொடைப்பயன் — எல்லாம் 
ஒறுக்கும் மதுகை உரனுடை யாளன் 
பொறுக்கும் பொறையே பொறை. 
Self-restraint in youth, gifts from the poor, and forbearance in the mighty are excellent.
The young man's self-restraint is self-restraint. The gift of him who owns no stores of wealth is gift indeed. When wan has means and might to punish every fault, if he forbear, call him the patient man. 

66.  கீழ்மக்கள் பழிப்பினும் மேன்மக்கள் பொறுப்பர் 
கல்எறிந் தன்ன கயவர்வாய் இன்னாச்சொல் 
எல்லாருங் காணப் பொறுத்துய்ப்பர் — ஒல்லை 
இடுநீற்றால் பைஅவிந்த நாகம்போல் தத்தம் 
குடிமையான் வாதிக்கப் பட்டு. 
Noble instinct restrains. 
As stones the base shower down their bitter words: the noble bear, in sight of all, and let them pass, by sense of noble worth constrained : like serpent's crest at once by touch of sacred ash subdued. 

67.  பிறர்க்குத் துன்பம் புரியார் பெரியார். 
மாற்றாராய் நின்றுதம் மாறேற்பார்க் கேலாமை 
ஆற்றாமை என்னார் அறிவுடையார் — ஆற்றாமை 
நேர்த்தின்னா மற்றவர் செய்தக்கால் தாம்அவரைப் 
பேர்த்தின்னா செய்யாமை நன்று. 
Return not evil for evil. 
When men stand forth as our enemies, and would begin the conflict, to decline the strife is not, in the language of the wise, lack of power. Even when men have confronted and done us intolerable evils, it is good not to do them evil in return.

68.  சான்றோர் கோபம் தானே தணியும். 
நெடுங்காலம் ஓடினும் நீசர் வெகுளி 
கெடுங்காலம் இன்றிப் பாக்கும் — அடுங்காலை 
நீர்கொண்ட வெப்பம்போல் தானே தணியுமே 
சீர்கொன்ட சான்றோர் சினம். 
The wrath of the base never expends itself. That of the good of itself dies out. Long time though base men's wrath run on, it spreads abroad, and knows no time when heat is spent; as the heat of water, when boiled at cooking time, itself grow's cool, the ire of perfect men of worth abates. 

69.  நற்குடிப் பிறந்தோர் நன்மையே செய்வார். 
உபகாரம் செய்ததனை ஓராதே தங்கண் 
அபகாரம் ஆற்றர் செயினும் — உபகாரம் 
தாஞ்செய்வ தல்லால் தவற்றினால் தீங்கூக்கல் 
வான்தோய் குடிப்பிறந்தார்க் கில். 
It is not the way of the noble to do evil to those who injure them. 
Though men think not of good received, and do much ill to men of family whose fame has touched the sky, these still do good; nor are they wont provoked by faults, to render evil to the thankless ones. 

70.  மேன்மக்கள் வாயில் தாழ்ந்தசொல் வெளிப்படா. 
கூர்த்துநாய் கௌவிக் கொளக்கண்டும் தம்வாயால்
பேர்த்துநாய் கௌவினார் ஈங்கில்லை — நீர்த்தன்றிக் 
கீழ்மக்கள் கீழாய் சொல்லியக்கால் சொல்பவோ 
மேன்மக்கள் தமவாயால் மீட்டு. 
Return not railing for railing. 
Though a dog, in range, should lay hold of them, there are none in the world who, in return, would lay hold of it with their mouth; and thus, when low men speak, not what is fitting, but low words, will high-minded men, in reply, utter such words with their mouth. 
----------

8. பொறையுடைமை   / Ch. 8. Patience  

71.  அறிவிலாரோடு உரையாடுதல் தீது. 
கோதை யருவிக் குளிர்வரை நன்னாட! 
பேதையோ டியாதும் உரையற்க — பேதை 
உரைப்பிற் சிதைந்துரைக்கும் ஒல்லும் வகையான் 
வழுக்கிக் கழிதலே நன்று. 
Don't argue with the foolish. 
Lord of the pleasant land, where down the cool mountains the streams fall as garlands!— With a fool hold no converse. If you speak with him, in replying he will pervert your words. To slip away from him as best you can is well. 

72. பொல்லாருரையையும் பொறுப்பதே பெருமை. 
நேரல்லார் நீரல்ல சொல்லியக்கால் மற்றது 
தாரித்திருத்தல் தகுதிமற் —றோரும் 
புகழ்மையாக் கொள்ளாது பொங்குநீர் ஞாலம் 
சமழ்மையாக் கொண்டு விடும். 
Insults from inferiors. 
When persons not our equals say unfitting things, to bear and to be still is worthy conduct. The world girt by foaming waters regards not a contrary course as praise-worthy, but as discreditable. 

73.  அன்பர் கடுஞ்சொல்லும் நன்மை பயக்கும் 
காதலார் சொல்லுங் கடுஞ்சொல் உவந்துரைக்கும் 
ஏதிலார் இன்சொலின் தீதாமோ — போதெலாம் 
மாதர்வண் டார்க்கும் மலிகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! 
ஆவ தறிவார்ப் பெறின். 
Harsh words of those who love are better than complaisant words of foes. 
Lord of the swelling sea's cool shore, where bright insects hum around every flower!—Are severe words from loving lips harder to bear, if men can only rightly estimate their result, than pleasant words that strangers courteously speak? 

74.  நன்மை செய்வோன் எந்நாளும் மகிழ்வான். 
அறிவ தறிந்தடங்கி அஞ்சுவ தஞ்சி 
உறுவ துலகுவப்பச் செய்து — பெறுவதனால் 
இன்புற்று வாழும் இயல்பினார் எஞ்ஞான்றுந் 
துன்புற்று வாழ்தல் அரிது. 
The thoroughly disciplined and contented man is happy. 
Those who know what should be known and rule themselves thereby; who fear what should be feared ; who use all their faculties to bless the world; and whose nature rejoices in all good gained: are for ever free from woes. 

75.  வேற்றுமை நட்பைத் தூற்றாது விடுக. 
வேற்றுமை யின்றிக் கலந்திருவர் நட்டக்கால் 
தேற்றா வொழுக்கம் ஒருவன்கண் உண்டாயின் 
ஆற்றுந் துணையும் பொறுக்க ; பொறானாயின் 
தூற்றாதே தூர விடல். 
If a friend act doubtfully, forgive or quietly withdraw. 
When two with strict accord unite in friendship's bond, if one betray the other's confidence by unkind act, this latter should endure as best he may. And if he can't endure, he should not divulge it, but withdraw himself. 

76.  துன்பம் செய்யினும் நண்பனை விடாதே. 
இன்னா செயினும் இனிய ஒழிகென்று 
தன்னையே தான்நோவின் அல்லது — துன்னிக் 
கலந்தாரைக் கைவிடுதல், கானக நாட!
விலங்கிற்கும் விள்ளல் அரிது. 
If a friend do evil to you, think it good, refrain from anger and blame yourself ; 
but never forsake him. 
Lord of the woodlands! Separation is hard even to beasts; therefore if friends do things that are unpleasant, think them pleasant. bid yourself cease (from wrath), and blame yourself alone; but forsake not those that have been joined to you in the intimacy of friendship. 

77.  பெரியோர் நட்பிற் பிழை பொறுப்பவரே. 
பெரியார் பெருநட்புக் கோடல்தாம் செய்த 
அரிய பொறுப்பஎன் றன்றோ — அரியரோ 
ஒல்என் அருவி உயர்வரை நன்னாட! 
நல்லசெய் வார்க்குத் தமர். 
Forbearance cements friendship. 
Is not the reason why the close friendship of the great is sought, that they will bear even with faults hard to endure? Lord of the good land of high mountains, with resounding waterfalls! — to good people are intimate friends rare? 

78. குறை நீக்குவோரிடம் குறைபாடு கூறுக. 
வற்றிமற் றாற்றப் பசிப்பினும் பண்பிலார்க் 
கற்றம் அறிய உரையற்க - அற்றம் 
மறைக்குந் துணையார்க் குரைப்பவே தம்மைத் 
துறக்குந் துணிவிலா தார். 
Bear want 
Though sore wasted with hunger, let not men tell out their destitution to ungracious churls. Those indeed who lack resolution to deny themselves may tell their wants to those who are able and willing to save them from destitution.

79.  இன்பமே வரினும் இழிசெயல் ஒழிக்க. 
இன்பம் பயந்தாங் கிழிவு தலைவரினும்
இன்பத்தின் பக்கம் இருந்தைக்கு —இன்பம் 
ஒழியாமை கண்டாலும் ஓங்கருவி நாட! 
பழியாகா ஆறே தலை. 
Forsake pleasure that brings disgrace. To avoid guilt is the chief matter. 
Although shameful things may present themselves. as things that yield pleasure, flee from that pleasure's side! Though thou couldst see pleasures that cease not soon, — Lord of the land of fountains high! — the guiltless way is best. 

80.  பொய்யுரை, பிறர்க்குக் கேடு செய்தல், தகவிலார் இடத்து உண்ணல் செய்யத் தகாதன. 
தான்கெடினும் தக்கார்கே டெண்ணற்க தன்உடம்பின் 
ஊன்கெடினும் உண்ணார்கைத் துண்ணற்க — வான்கவிந்த 
வையகம் எல்லாம் பெறினும் உரையற்க 
பொய்யோ டிடைமிடைந்த சொல். 
Never desire evil, nor eat with improper persons, nor lie. 
Though ruin seize you plan not ruin to the just! Though body's flesh should waste, eat not from hands unfit! Though the whole earth o'er-arched by heaven accrue as gain, never speak word with falsehood mixed ! 


9. பிறர்மனை நயவாமை / Ch. 9. The Not Desiring Other Men's Wives  

81.  அயலார் மனைவியை அறிஞர் விரும்பார். 
அச்சம் பெரிதால், அதற்கின்பம் சிற்றளவால் 
நிச்சம் நினையுங்காற் கோக்கொலையால், —நிச்சலும் 
கும்பிக்கே கூர்த்த வினையால் பிறன்தாரம் 
நம்பற்க நாணுடை யார். 
Against adultery. 
The fear it brings is great ; its pleasure is brief ; each day if it is divulged death threatens by the king's decree; and ever it is a deed that tends to the pains of hell; O shamefast men, desire not your neighbour's wife. 

82.  அயல் மனை விரும்பினால் அச்சம் பகை பழி பாவம் சேரும். 
அறம்புகழ் கேண்மை பெருமைஇந் நான்கும் 
பிறன் தாரம் நச்சுவார்ச் சேரா — பிறன்தாரம் 
நச்சுவார்ச் சேரும் பகைபழி பாவம்என் 
றச்சத்தோ டிந்நாற் பொருள். 
The sinner forfeits much, and incurs much. 
Virtue, praise, friendship, greatness, all these four draw not anigh the men who covet their neighbour's wife. Hatred, disgrace and guilt, with fear, these four possessions abide with men who covet their neighbour's wife. 

83.  அயல்மனை விருப்பம் எப்போதும் அச்சம் ஆம். 
புக்க விடத்தச்சம் போதரும் போதச்சம் 
துய்க்கு மிடத்தச்சம் தோன்றாமற் காப்பச்சம் 
எக்காலும் அச்சம் தருமால் எவன்கொலோ 
உட்கான் பிறன்இல் புகல். 
Fear on every side. 
In entering in there's fear; in home returning fear; during enjoyment is fear; in guarding the secret is fear; it evermore brings fear: why shuns he not with dread the entrance of neighbour's house? 

84.  பிறர்மனை விரும்பினால் பெருந்துன்பம் விளையும். 
காணின் குடிப்பழியாம் கையுறின் கால்குறையும் 
ஆணின்மை செய்யுங்கால் அச்சமாம் — நீள்நிரயத் 
துன்பம் பயக்குமால்; துச்சாரி! நீ கண்ட 
இன்பம் எனக்கெனைத்தால் கூறு. 
The way of transgressors is hard. 
If any one see, disgrace lights on the house; if any hand should seize, leg's maimed; in the doing of the shameful deed is dread; it yields as fruit vast hell's affliction : tell me, O profligate, what measure of delight is thine ? 

85.  பிறர்மனை விழைந்தோர் பேடியாய்ப் பிறப்பர். 
செம்மையொன் றின்றிச் சிறியா ரினத்தராய்க் 
கொம்மை வரிமுலையாள் தோள்மரீஇ - உம்மை 
வலியாற் பிறர்மனைமேற் சென்றாரே இம்மை 
அலியாகி ஆடிஉண் பார். 
Punishment of ravishers. 
Those who, in a former state, without any regard to right, becoming associates of the mean, enjoyed the embraces of beautiful women, and by violence approached their neighbour's wife, in this state will become eunuchs, and dancing shall earn their bread. 

86.  அயல்மனை விரும்புவது நல்லறம் ஆரோ? 
பல்லார் அறியப் பறையறைந்து நாள்கேட்டுக் 
கல்யாணம் செய்து கடிப்புக்க— மெல்லியல் 
காதல் மனையாளும் இல்லாளா என்ஒருவன் 
ஏதில் மனையாளை நோக்கு. 
Why should a man who has his own wife look at his neighbour's ?
While his loving wife dwells in his home, the tender one whom he espoused, — seeking (out an auspicious) day, and sounding the drum, for many folks to know,—and 'whom he guards as his own, what means a man's glance at another's wife?

87.  பிறர்மனை விரும்புதல் பேதையின் செயலே. 
அம்பல் அயல்எடுப்ப அஞ்சித் தமர்பரீஇ 
வம்பலன் பெண்மரீஇமைந்துற்று — நம்பும் 
நிலைமைஇல் நெஞ்சத்தான் துப்புரவு பாம்பின் 
தலைநக்கி யன்ன துடைத்து. 
Pleasure dearly purchased. 
The enjoyment of the man of unstable heart, who under the influence of infatuation approaches his neighbour's wife and sets his affections upon her, while neighbours spread abroad his guilt, and kinsmen dread and mourn, is like (that of the person who takes pleasure in) licking a serpent's head. 

88. அறிஞர் காமம் அகத்துள் அடங்கும். 
பரவா வெளிப்படா பல்லோர்கண் தங்கா 
உரவோர்கண் காமநோய் ஓஓ கொடிதே! 
விரவாருள் நாணுப் படல்அஞ்சி யாதும் 
உரையாதுள் ஆறி விடும். 
The passions of virtuous men are under control. 
The disease of lust in men mighty (in wisdom) gains not ascendancy, is not revealed, does not remain fixed on many objects. 
O! it is a cruel conflict; but fearing to incur shame in the midst of their foes, they say nothing about it, and it is extinguished within them. 

89. அகம் சுடும் காமம் அதனாற் கொடியது. 
அம்பும் அழலும் அவிர்கதிர் ஞாயிறும் 
வெம்பிச் சுடினும் புறம்சுடும் — வெம்பிக் 
கவற்றி மனத்தைச் சுடுதலாற் காமம் 
அவற்றினும் அஞ்சப் படும். 
Lust the most deadly enemy. 
Arrow and fire and sun with glistening rays may rage and burn; but these burn the outer man alone. Lust rages and distracts and burns the mind, and is more to be feared than they. 

90.தீயினும் கொடியது காமம் என்று எண்ணுக. 
ஊருள் எழுந்த உருகெழு செந்தீக்கு 
நீருள் குளித்தும் உயலாகும் — நீருள் 
குளிப்பினும் காமம் சுடுமேகுன்றேறி 
ஒளிப்பினும் காமம் சுடும். 
Fire and lust. 
From the ruddy fire that fiercely rises in the village you may scape by bathing in water. — Although you bathe in water, lust will burn; and though you climb the hill and hide you there, still lust will burn! 
-----------

10. ஈகை    / Ch. 10. Liberality  

91. கொடை மேலுலகில் இன்பமும் கொடுக்கும். 
இல்லா இடத்தும் இயைந்த அளவினால் 
உள்ள இடம்போல் பெரிதுவந்து — மெல்லக் 
கொடையொடு பட்ட குணனுடை மாந்தர்க் 
கடையாவாம் ஆண்டைக் கதவு. 
Unchilled by adversity the good do good : heaven's gate is open to them. 
Even in their adverse hour, up to the measure of their means, as in the prosperous times, with large rejoicing heart to give is their nature still. To such good men heaven's gate is never closed. 

92.  மூப்புப் பிணிவருமுன் பகுத்துண்ணுக. 
முன்னரே சாநாள் முனிதக்க மூப்புள 
பின்னரும் பீடழிக்கும் நோயுள — கொன்னே 
பரவன்மின் பற்றன்மின் பாத்துண்மின் யாதுங் 
கரவன்மின் கைத்துண்டாம் போழ்து. 
Death, old age, disease stand round. Give! 
Before (you) are death's day and age detestable ; behind is disease that humbles pride. Discursive thoughts indulge not. Cling not to earth. Eat, sharing food; hide not your powers while wealth is in your hand. 

93.  செல்வத்தைத் துய்த்தலும் கொடுத்தலும் சிறப்பாம். 
நடுக்குற்றுத் தற்சேர்ந்தார் துன்பந்துடையார் 
கொடுத்துத்தான் துய்ப்பினும் ஈண்டுங்கால் ஈண்டும் 
இடுக்குற்றுப் பற்றினும் நில்லாது செல்வம் 
விடுக்கும் வினையுலந்தக் கால். 
It is useless saving: fate gives and takes away. 
Though dread of want they do not relieve the woes of men who as suppliants draw near! Yet although men enjoy and give, wealth grows in growing time: cling to it, and yet it flies when former deeds that brought wealth have lost their power. 

94. இயல்வது கொடுத்தலே ஏற்றவாழ் வாகும். 
இம்மி அரிசித் துணையானும் வைகலும் 
நும்மில் இயைவ கொடுத்துண்மின் — உம்மைக் 
கொடாஅ தவரென்பர் குண்டுநீர் வையத் 
தடாஅ அடுப்பி னவர். 
Give according to your power. 
Daily having given somewhat, though but the fraction of a grain of rice, according to your ability, eat ye (your own food). 
Those who gave not in that world, men say on this earth girt by deep waters are those on whose hearth nothing is cooked. 

95. இரவாமை கொடையினும் இருமடங்கு நல்லது. 
மறுமையும் இம்மையும் நோக்கி ஒருவர்க் 
குறுமா றியைவ கொடுத்தல் — வறுமையால் 
ஈதல் இசையா தெனினும் இரவாமை 
ஈதல் இரட்டி யுறும். 
Do charity for the sake of this world and the future ; and beg not. 
Regarding the other world and this world, give to any suppliant, in fitting way, according to your ability. And if on account of poverty giving is not possible, yet refraining from begging is twice as meritorious as giving. 

96. பகுத்துண்டு வாழ்வதே பயனுடைய வாழ்வு. 
நடுவூருள் வேதிகை சுற்றுக்கோட் புக்க 
படுபனை அன்னர் பலர்நச்ச வாழ்வார் 
குடிகொழுத்தக்கக் கண்ணுங் கொடுத்துண்ணாமாக்கள் 
இடுகாட்டுள் ஏற்றைப் பனை. 
The fertile and sterile palms. 
Those who live desired of many are as a fertile palm entered in the altar's enclosure in midmost of the town. Those who, even when their house grows great, give not before they eat, are like the sterile palm in the burning ground. 

97. உயர்ந்தோர் உதவியால் உலகம் நிலைபெறும். 
பெயற்பால் மழைபெய்யாக் கண்ணும் உலகம் 
செயற்பால செய்யா விடினும் — கயற்புலால் 
புன்னை கடியும் பொருகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப 
என்னை உலகுய்யும் ஆறு. 
In troublous time charity must not be omitted. 
Even when the rain rains not in due season, if all the world should fail in virtuous actions that ought to be done, —Lord of the warring sea's cool shore, where acrid fume of fish in Punnai's perfume dies! - how scapes the world? 

98. எதிர் உதவி வேண்டி யீதல் கொடையன்று. 
ஏற்றகை மாற்றாமை என்னானும் தாம்வரையார் 
ஆற்றாதார்க் கீவதாம் ஆண்கடன் — ஆற்றின் 
மலிகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப மாறிவார்க் கீதல் 
பொலிகடன் என்னும் பெயர்த்து. 
Give to him who cannot recompense thee. 
Denying to no out-stretched hand, to give to needy men as he hath power, is duty of a man.—Lord of the swelling sea's cool shore !—A gift to those that can return the gift is usury !

99. இல்லை யென்னாமற் சிறிதேனும் ஈக. 
இறப்பச் சிறிதென்னா தில்லென்னா தென்றும் 
அறப்பயன் யார்மாட்டுஞ் செய்க — முறைப்புதவின் 
ஐயம் புகூஉந் தவசி கடிஞைபோற் 
பைய நிறைத்து விடும். 
Give though you have but little. The beggar's dish is filled in time. 
Say not ‘ 'tis passing little,' nor ‘ ' tis nought I give;' on all confer thy boon of virtuous charity, Like the dish the mendicant presents from door to door, by frequent doles 'twill be filled full. 

100. வையக முழுவதும் வள்ளல்சீர் பரவும். 
கடிப்பிடு கண்முரசம் காதத்தோர் கேட்பர் 
இடித்து முழங்கியதோர் யோசனையோர் கேட்பர் 
அடுக்கிய மூவுலகும் கேட்குமே சான்றோர் 
கொடுத்தா ரெனப்படும் சொல். 
The fame of charitable deeds. 
The sound of beaten drum a katham off they'll hear; the thunder's voice through a whole yojanai will reach men's ears; the three successive worlds will hear the word that says, ‘Men excellent their gifts have given.' 
------------

11. பழவினை / Ch. 11. Old Deeds  

101.முன்செய்த வினை செய்தவனையே தேடிவரும். 
பல்லாவுள் உய்த்து விடினும் குழக்கன்று 
வல்லதாம் தாய்நாடிக் கோடலைத் — தொல்லைப் 
பழவினையும் அன்ன தகைத்தேதற் செய்த 
கிழவனை நாடிக் கொளற்கு. 
Deeds come home to the doer. 
Although you send forth the tender calf amid many cows, it has unerring skill to seek out its own mother. Deeds of old days have even so the power to search him out to whom their fruit pertains. 

102.நல்வினை செய்யாதவன் வாழ்வு பயன் அற்றது. 
உருவும் இளமையும் ஒண்பொருளும் உட்கும் 
ஒருவழி நில்லாமை கண்டும் — ஒருவழி 
ஒன்றேயும் இல்லாதான் வாழ்க்கை உடம்பிட்டு 
நின்றுவீழ்ந் தக்க துடைத்து. 
A merely animal life. 
Beauty and youth, and glittering wealth and reverence abide not in one stay. To him who, though he sees this, does no single virtuous act in this one stage of being, life's joy stands with the body and falls with it. 

103. செல்வத்தை யாவரும் விரும்புவர். 
வளம்பட வேண்டாதார் யார்யாரு மில்லை ; 
அளந்தன போகம் அவரவர் ஆற்றால்; 
விளங்காய் திரட்டினார் இல்லை; களங்கனியைக்
கார்எனச் செய்தாரும் இல். 
Wishes are inoperative. 
Who would not see Prosperity? All seek her gifts; but as men's ways are, so each man's enjoyments are meted out. Who made the Vilam's apple round? Or who gave its dusky hue to the Kalam fruit ? 

104. அவரவர்க்கு வரும் இன்பதுன்பங்கள் அகற்றமுடியா. 
உறற்பால நீக்கல் உறுவர்க்கும் ஆகா 
பெறற்பா லனையவும் அன்னவாம்; மாரி 
வறப்பின் தருவாரும் இல்லை; அதனைச் 
சிறப்பின் தணிப்பாரும் இல். 
What must be, must be. 
Not even saints can drive away predestined ills; and all the fated gain must needs accrue. In time of drought who can bestow the rain ? Or who can check its rich abundance when it falls? 

105. பழவினைப் பயனாற் பெரியோரும் பெருமைகெட்டு வாழ்வர். 
தினைத்துணைய ராகித்தம் தேசுஉள் அடக்கிப் 
பனைத்துணையார் வைகலும் பாடழிந்து வாழ்வர் 
நினைப்பக் கிடந்த தெவனுண்டாம் மேலை 
வினைப்பய னல்லாற் பிற. 
Vicissitudes of life are fate. 
Those who lose like stately palms, when their greatness is gone, become small asthe millet seed, hiding their glory within, —and so they pass their days. This is the fruit of deeds of former days: when you think of it, what other cause can there be? 

106.இளமையில் அறிஞர் இறப்பதும் வினைப்பயன். 
பல்லான்ற கேள்விப் பயனுணர்வார் வீயவும் 
கல்லாதார் வாழ்வ தறிதிரேல் — கல்லாதார் 
சேதன மென்னுமச் சேற்கத் தின்மையால் 
கோதென்று கொள்ளாதாம் கூற்று. 
Why ignorant men live, while the wise die. 
Those that know the fruit of varied and profound learning die off, while the unlearned joyously live on. Would you know the cause ? — The unlearned posses within no 'sap of sapience'; — so death deems then refuse stalks, and takes them not! 

107. பிச்சையெடுப்பதும் முற்பிறப்பிற் செய்த வினைப்பயன்தான். 
இடும்பைகூர் நெஞ்சத்தார் எல்லாருங் காண 
நெடுங்கடை நின்றுழல்வ தெல்லாம் — அடம்பம்பூ 
அன்னம் கிழிக்கும் அலைகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! 
முன்னை வினையாய் விடும். 
Why some beg from door to door. 
Lord of the sea's cool shore, where amid the wave swans sport, tearing to shreds the Adambu flowers ! When those whose hearts are sore with urgent need standbegging, and wander through the long street, in sight of all, this is the fruit of former deeds. 

108. செய்த வினையால் அறிஞரும் தீவினை புரிவர். 
அறியாரும் அல்லர் அறிவ தறிந்தும் 
பழியோடு பட்டவை செய்தல் — வளியோடி 
நெய்தல் நறவுயிர்க்கும் நீள்கடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! 
செய்த வினையான் வரும். 
Why even wise men sin. 
They are not ignorant; but, though what man should know they know, yet they do deeds that bring guilt to their souls. — Lord of the wide sea's pleasant shore, where breezes breathe the lily's fragrance round ! — This comes from former deeds. 

109.வருவன வந்துசேரும் ஒருவனுக்கு. 
	ஈண்டுநீர் வையத்துள் எல்லாரும் எத்துணையும் 
வேண்டார்மன் தீய ; விழைபயன் நல்லவை 
வேண்டினும் வேண்டாவிடினும் உறற்பால
தீண்டா விடுதல் அரிது. 
Desires are unavailing. 
On the earth begirt by gathering waters no men desire in anywise evil things, but choice fruit of good things. Yet whether they desire, or abhor, it is hard to shun the touch of what fate assigns. 

110.ஆவன ஆகும்; போவன போகும்: வருந்துவது பயனின்று. 
சிறுகா பெருகா முறைபிறழ்ந்து வாரா 
உறுகாலத் தூற்றாகா ஆமிடத்தே ஆகும் 
சிறுகாலைப் பட்ட பொறியும் அதனால் 
இறுகாலத் தென்னை பரிவு. 
Fate is unalterable. Why grieve? 
The early fates diminish not, nor do they increase, they come not in order changedhelp in troublous times is none; what haps will happen, there and then; and so, when all things fail, why grieve?
-----------

12. மெய்ம்மை / Ch. 12. Truth: Reality  

111.இயன்றதை வழங்காதிருப்பது குற்றம். 
இசையா ஒருபொருள் இல்என்றால் யார்க்கும் 
வசையன்று வையத் தியற்கை — நசைஅழுங்க 
நின்றோடிப் பொய்த்தல் நிரைதொடீஇ! செய்ந்நன்றி 
கொன்றாரின் குற்ற முடைத்து. 
Broken promises. 
O maid with many armlets graced! To answer 'no' disgraces no man, when the boon asked exceeds his means. It is the world's course. But to delay and cheat the soul faint with desire is a sin like his who 'slays' a benefit conferred. 

112.எவரும் தத்தம் இயற்கையின் நிற்பர். 
தக்காரும் தக்கவர் அல்லாரும் தம்நீர்மை 
எக்காலும் குன்றல் இலராவர் —அக்காரம் 
யாவரே தின்னினும் கையாதாம் கைக்குமாம் 
தேவரே தின்னினும் வேம்பு. 
Natures change not. 
Men of worth, and men unworthy too, retain their natures ever unchanged. Whoever they be that eat it, sugar can never grow bitter; and margosa is bitter even when eaten by gods. 

113.செல்வம் வந்தபோது எல்லாரும் சேர்வர். 
	காலாடு போழ்தில் கழிகிளைஞர் வானத்து 
மேலாடு மீனின் பலராவர் — எலா 
இடர்ஒருவர் உற்றக்கால் ஈர்ங்குன்ற நாட!
தொடர்புடையேம் என்பார் சிலர். 
Friends in adverse and prosperous time. 
When a man moves prosperonsly on, devoted kinsfolk are countless as shining stars that move in the upper heaven. But when grievous affliction haps,—Lord of the dripping hills !—few claim close alliance with him. 

114. செல்வத்தால் இன்பமும் தருமமும் எய்தலாம். 
வடுவிலா வையத்து மன்னிய மூன்றில் 
நடுவண தெய்த இருதலையும் எய்தும்! 
நடுவண தெய்தாதான் எய்தும் உலைப்பெய் 
தடுவது போலும் துயர். 
Wealth the essential things. Virtue, wealth, and pleasure. 
Of the three things that endure upon this faultless earth, he who gains the midmost gains the two extremes also. He who gains not the midmost gains the cruel smart that the turtle feels when put into the pot to boil. 

115. செல்வர் வாய்ச்சொல்லே செல்லும் எங்கும். 
நல்ஆவின் கன்றாயின் நாகும் விலைபெறூஉம் 
கல்லாரே ஆயினும் செல்வர்வாய்ச்சொல் செல்லும் 
புல்ஈரப் போழ்தின் உழவேபோல் மீதாடிச் 
செல்லாவாம் நல்கூர்ந்தார் சொல். 
The words of the rich and of the poor. 
A young heifer fetches a good price when it is the calf of a good cow; so the words of rich men though unlearned, pass current. Poor men's words, like the plough when moisture is scanty, merely graze the surface and are of no avail. 

116. அறிவிலார் நூல்கற்றாலும் அடங்கார். 
இடம்பட மெய்ஞ்ஞானம் கற்பினும் என்றும் 
அடங்காதார் என்றும் அடங்கார் — தடங்கண்ணாய் 
உப்பொடு நெய்பால் தயிர்காயம் பெய்தடினும் 
கைப்பறா பேய்ச்சுரையின் காய். 
Wisdom cannot benefit the undisciplined. 
O wide-eyed one! though you cook the wild gourd pouring in salt, ghee, milk, curds, and spices, it never loses its bitterness. So those who never discipline themselves, though they may learn extensive works of true wisdom, never become disciplined. 

117. மதியாதவரைத் தாமும் மதியாது விடுதலே மாண்பு 
தம்மை இகழ்வாரைத் தாம்அவரின் முன்இகழ்க 
என்னை அவரொடு பட்டது? —புன்னை 
விறல்பூங் கமழ்கானல் வீங்குநீர்ச் சேர்ப்ப! 
உறற்பால யார்க்கும் உறும். 
Scorn the scorners. 
When men scorn you, before their faces scorn them too ! what has a man to do with them? — Lord of shore where beauteous Punnai-flowers perfume the glades that surround the swelling tide, — what fated comes to all! 

118. அறங்கள் யாவும் ஒருதன்மை யுடையன. 
ஆவே றுருவின ஆயினும் ஆபயந்த 
பால்வே றுருவின அல்லவாம் — பால் போல் 
ஒருதன்மைத் தாகும் அறநெறி ஆபோல் 
உருவு பலகொளல் ஈங்கு. 
Cows of many colours, milk always white. Virtue one-many sects. 
Though cows in form are diverse, the milk they yield is not diverse. The way of virtue, like that milk, is one in nature, though the schools that teach it here are like those cows, of many forms. 

119. எல்லாரும் துன்பமும் இன்பமும் அடைவர். 
யாஅர் உலகத்தோர் சொல் இல்லார் தேருங்கால் 
யாஅர் உபாயத்தின் வாழாதார் — யாஅர் 
இடையாக இன்னாத தெய்தாதார் யாஅர் 
கடைபோகச் செல்வம் உய்த் தார் 
Four questions. The common lot. 
Look well! of whom hath not the world found word to say ? And who have not by prudence prospered in life's way? Ah! who in life's mid course no bitter grief have known ? Ah! who to end of life have kept their wealth their own? 

120. உயிருடன் செல்வது செய்வினை யொன்றே. 
தாம் செய்வினையல்லால் தம்மொடு செல்வதுமற்(று) 
யாங்கணும் தேரின் பிறிதில்லை — ஆங்குத்தாம் 
போற்றிப் புனைந்த உடம்பும் பயம்இன்றே 
கூற்றம்கொண் டோடும் பொழுது. 
Nothing accompanies in death but deeds. 
Save a man's deed: nought goes with him, search where you will. The body which men cherish so, and adorn, is itself profitless indeed when death shall seize and hurry off with it. 
------

13.  தீவினையச்சம்  /  Ch. 13. Dread of Evil Deeds 


121. பிறவுயிர்களைக் கொன்று புலாலுண்ணல் பெரும்பாவம். 
துக்கத்துள் தூங்கித் துறவின்கண் சேர்கலா 
மக்கட் பிணத்த சுடுகாடு — தொக்க 
விலங்கிற்கும் புள்ளிற்கும் காடே புலன்கெட்ட 
புல்லறி வாளர் வயிறு. 
Men lead lives of self-indulgence. 
The burning ground is filled with the corpses of men that will not give themselves up to a self renouncing life, but oscillate amid sorrows; and the maws of perverted foolish men are a mere burning-ground for beasts and birds.

122. பறவைகளைக் கூட்டில் அடைப்பது பாவம். 
இரும்பார்க்குங் காலராய் ஏதிலார்க் காளாய்க் 
கரும்பார் கழனியுட் சேர்வர் — சுரும்பார்க்கும் 
காட்டுளாய் வாழும் சிவலும் குறும்பூழும் 
கூட்டுளாய்க் கொண்டுவைப் பார். 
Penalty for imprisoning birds. 
Their legs in iron bound, as slaves to alien lords they will till the black and barren soil, who snared and kept in cages partridges and quails, that dwell in wilds where beetles hum amid the flowers. 

123. பழவினையால் நான் தொழுநோயும் வரும் 
அக்கேபோல் அங்கை ஒழிய, விரலழுகித் 
துக்கத் தொழுநோய் எழுபவே — அக்கால் 
அலவனைக் காதலித்துக் கால்முறித்துத் தின்ற 
பழவினை வந்தடைந்தக் கால். 
The penalty incurred by crab-eaters. 
Like fire their palms shall glow, their fingers rotaway, who loved in other times on crabs to feed, and broke their joints, what time the guilt of ‘olden deeds' comes home, and leprosy's fierce pangs assail. 

124. தீயவரோடு கூடின் நல்ல வரும் தீயவராவர் 
நெருப்பழல் சேர்ந்தக்கால் நெய்போல் வதூஉம் 
எரிப்பச்சட் டெவ்வநோய் ஆக்கும் — பரப்பக் 
கொடுவினைய ராகுவர் கோடாரும் கோடிக் 
கடுவினையர் ஆகியார்ச் சார்ந்து. 
Bad companions. 
Even things (soft and soothing) like ghee, when joined with the fierce heat of fire, will blaze and burn, and cause bitter anguish : so even upright men are perverted and give themselves up to deeds of utter evil, when they attach themselves to those whose deeds are evil. 

125. பெரியவர் நட்புப் பிறைபோல் வளரும் 
பெரியவர் கேண்மை பிறைபோல நாளும் 
வரிசை வரிசையா நந்தும் — வரிசையால் 
வானூர் மதியம் போல் வைகலும் தேயுமே 
தானே சிறியார் தொடர்பு. 
Friendships with great and mean. 
Great men's intimate regard will daily grow in order due like the crescent moon. Mean men's alliance like the full moon that rides the sky daily by degrees dwindles away of itself. 

126. நன்றாக ஆய்ந்து நட்புக்கொள்ள வேண்டும். 
சான்றோர்என மதித்துச் சார்ந்தாய்மன் சார்ந்தாய்க்குச் 
சான்றாண்மை சார்ந்தார்கண் இல்லாயின் சார்ந்தோய்கேள் 
சாந்தகத் துண்டென்று செப்புத் திறந்தொருவன் 
பாம்பகத்துக் கண்ட துடைத்து. 
Disappointment and danger from foolish attachments. 
Thou didst attach thyself (to unworthy persons), saying, they are men of absolute integrity! If to thee who hast thus attached thyself, integrity in those thine intimates does not appear; hear, O thou who hast so attached thyself, it is as if one opened a casket, thinking it contained an odorous unguent, and saw a snake within. 

127. மக்கள் மனமும் செயலும் மாறுபட்டிருப்பர் 
யாஅர் ஒருவர் ஒருவர்தம் உள்ளத்தைத் 
தேரும் துணைமை உடையவர் — சாரல் 
கனமணி நின்றிமைக்கும் நாட!கேள்; மக்கள் 
மனம் வேறு செய்கையும் வேறு. 
Man cannot fathom other men's minds. 
What single man has power to search and clearly know the inmost self of other men? Lord of the land where weighty gems glisten on mountain slope, O hear ! — Men's minds are otherwise, and otherwise their deeds. 

128. கன்ளநட்புக் கருத்திற்கு வருத்தம் தரும் 
உள்ளத்தான் நள்ளா துறுதித் தொழிலராய்க் 
கள்ளத்தான் நட்டார் கழிகேண்மை — தெள்ளிப் 
புனற்செதும்பு நின்றலைக்கும் பூங்குன்ற நாட! 
மனத்துக்கண் மாசாய் விடும். 
Friends from self-interest 
Lord of the flowery hilly land where streams wash out and carry hither and thither (precious things) from the marshy land ! — The effusive friendship of those who do not attach themselves (to us) in heart, but perform certain friendly acts merely to strengthen their own position, and who form friendships guilefully, will issue in disappointment to the minds (of those who are intimate with them). 

129. அறிவில்லார் நட்பினை அஞ்சிவிடுத்தல் நல்லது 
ஓக்கிய ஒள்வாள்தன் ஒன்னார்கைப்பட்டக்கால் 
ஊக்கம் அழிப்பதூஉம் மெய்யாகும் — ஆக்கம் 
இருமையும் சென்று சுடுதலால் நல்ல 
கருமமே கல்லார்கண் தீர்வு. 
Ruin from unfitting intimacies. 
If the glittering swords a man brandishes (be allowed to) fall into the hands of his foes, it will assuredly come about that he will thus destroy also his own power of action. So wealth (bestowed on the foolish) will go and burn up (merit accruing in) both worlds, and therefore the really good thing is to keep clear of the foolish. 

130. நல்வினையே உயிரோடு தொடர்ந்து சென்று நன்மை பயக்கும் 
மனைப்பாசம் கைவிடாய் மக்கட்கென் றேங்கி 
எனைத்தூழி வாழ்தியோ நெஞ்சே — எனைத்தும் 
சிறுவரையே ஆயினும் செய்தநன் றல்லால் 
உறுபயனோ இல்லை உயிர்க்கு. 
To do good is life's gain. 
O mind! thou leavest not the bonds of home. How many cycles, pray, with thou live yearning still for children? Save the good he has done, however small its measure may be, there is no true result to any living soul. 

அறத்துப்பால் முற்றும்.   End of Part I. 
-----------

பகுதி 2. பொருட்பால் /  PART II. ON WEALTH
14. கல்வி   /Ch. 14. Learning

131. கல்வி யழகே சிறந்த அழகு. 
குஞ்சி யழகும் கொடுந்தானைக் கோட்டழகும் 
மஞ்சள் அழகும் அழகல்ல - நெஞ்சத்து 
நல்லம்யாம் என்னும் நடுவு நிலைமையால் 
கல்வி யழகே யழகு. 
Learning, the only beauty. 
Beauty of locks, beauty of circling garments' folds, beauty of saffron tint: these are not beauty true. Integrity of soul that brings the conscience peace is learning's gift: that only is beauty true! 

132. அறியாமை நோயை யகற்றும் மருந்து கல்வி 
இம்மை பயக்குமால் ஈயக் குறைவின்றால் 
தம்மை விளக்குமால் தாமுளராக் கேடின்றால் 
எம்மை யுலகத்தும் யாம்காணேம் கல்விபோல் 
மம்மர் அறுக்கும் மருந்து
The remedy for bewilderment 
Since in this world it yields fruit; since given it grows not less ; since it makes men illustrious; since it perishes not as long as (its possessors) themselves exist; in any world we see not any medicine that, like learning, removes the delusions of sense. 

133. கலைபல கற்றவர் தலைவர் ஆவார். 
களர்நிலத் துப்பிறந்த உப்பினைச் சான்றோர் 
விளைநிலத்து நெல்லின் விழுமிதாக் கொள்வர்; 
கடைநிலத்தோ ராயினும் கற்றறிந் தோரைத் 
தலைநிலத்து வைக்கப் படும். 
The learned, though low-born, are first. 
The excellent regard the salt produced in brackish ground as choicer than the Nel from fertile soil. It is fitting to place in the first rank the learned wise, though (sprung) from the lowest origin. 

134. மக்கட்குக் கல்வியே நிலை பெற்ற செல்வம். 
வைப்புழிக் கோட்பாடா வாய்த்தீயிற் கேடில்லை 
மிக்க சிறப்பின் அரசர் செறின்வவ்வார்
எச்சம் எனஒருவன் மக்கட்குச் செய்வன 
விச்சைமற் றல்ல பிற. 
Learning, the best legacy. 
It cannot be taken from its place of deposit; it does not perish anywhere by fire; if kings of surpassing grandeur are angry they cannot take it away; (and therefore) what any man should provide for his children as a legacy is learning. Other things are not (real wealth). 

135. உண்மை நூல்களையே யுணர்ந்து கற்கவேண்டும். 
கல்வி கரையில கற்பவர் நாள்சில 
மெல்ல நினைக்கின் பிணிபல — தெள்ளிதின் 
ஆராய்ந் தமைவுடைய கற்பவே நீரொழியப் 
பாலுண் குருகின் தெரிந்து. 
Discriminating study. 
Learning hath no bounds, the learners' days are few. If you think calmly diseases many wait around! With clear discrimination learn what is meet for you, like the swan that leaving the water drinks the milk. 

136. தாழ்குலம் உயர்குலம் பாராது கற்றவனை மதிக்கவேண்டும். 
தோணி இயக்குவான் தொல்லை வருணத்துக் 
காணின் கடைப்பட்டான் என்றிகழார் — காணாய் 
அவன்துணையா ஆறுபோய் அற்றேநூல் கற்ற 
மகன் துணையா நல்ல கொளல். 
Never mind the boatman's caste if he take you over! 
As none contemn the ferryman, by old caste rule to lowest rank assigned, but cross the stream by help he lends; so take thou teachings good and wise by help of him who is the learned man. 

137. கற்றோருடன் கூடி உரையாடி மகிழ்வதே பேரின்பம் ஆகும். 
தவலருந் தொல்கேள்வித் தன்மை யுடையார் 
இகலிலர் எஃகுடையார் தம்முள் குழீஇ 
நகலின் இனிதாயின் காண்பாம் அகல்வானத் 
தும்பர் உறைவார் பதி. 
The supreme enjoyment of the society of learned and amiable men. 
We shall see whether any greater bliss is found in the city inhabited by the dwellers in the ample heaven than is felt when men of natures formed by old imperishable lore, from rivalries exempt keen as tempered steel, meet together and laugh. 

138. கற்றவர் நட்பு வளரவளர இன்பம் தரும். 
கனைகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! கற்றறிந்தார் கேண்மை 
நுனியின் கரும்புதின்றற்றே — நுனிநீக்கித் 
தூரின்தின் றன்ன தகைத்தரோ பண்பிலா 
ஈர மிலாளர் தொடர்பு. 
The friendship of the learned ever grows sweeter, that of the unlearned ever 
diminishes in sweetness. 
Lord of the cool shore of the resounding sea intimacy with learned people is like eating sugar cane from the (tender, juicy) tip; association with graceless. sapless men is like leaving the (tender) tip and eating it from the (hard, dry) root. 

139. கற்றவரைச் சார்ந்தாற் கல்லாரும் நல்லறிவு பெறுவர். 
கல்லாரே யாயினும் கற்றாரைச் சேர்ந்தொழுகின் 
நல்லறிவு நாளும் தலைப்படுவர் — தொல்சிறப்பின் 
ஒண்ணிறப் பாதிரிப்பூச் சேர்தலால் புத்தோடு 
தண்ணீர்க்குத் தான்பயந் தாங்கு. 
The benefits of association with the learned. The pot impregnated with odour. Though themselves unlearned, if men live in association with the learned they advance daily in excellent knowledge. The new vessel, by contact with the Padri-flower of old renown and lustrous hue, imparts fragrance to the cold water it contains. 

140. அறிவு நூல் கற்றால் மயக்கம் நீக்கும். 
அலகுசால் கற்பின் அறிவுநூல் கல்லா 
துலகநூல் ஓதுவ தெல்லாம் — கலகல 
கூஉம் துணையல்லால் கொண்டு தடுமாற்றம் 
போஒம் துணையறிவார் இல். 
Books of wisdom are the best. Others cannot remove confusion of mind. 
If men leaving works of wisdom, that contain well-weighed instruction, unstudied, devote themselves to the recitation of mere worldly literature, they will acquire a store of empty high-sounding words, but not that wisdom by means of which mental confusion (that treats unreal things as real) is removed. 
------------

15. குடிப்பிறப்பு /  Ch. 15. High Birth  

141. உயர்குடிப்பிறந்தார் வறுமையிலும் ஒழுக்கம் தவறார். 
உடுக்கை உலறி உடம்பழிந்தக் கண்ணும் 
குடிப்பிறப் பாளர்தம் கொள்கையிற் குன்றார் 
இடுக்கண் தலைவந்தக் கண்ணும் அரிமா 
கொடிப்புல் கறிக்குமோ மற்று. 
In adversity noble men do not desert their principles. 
Though their clothes may be old and their body worn with want, men of noble birth diminish nothing of their due observances. Will the lion nibble the creeping grass although sorest need should assail him? 

142. கீழ்மக்கள் செல்வம் வந்தாலும் பெருந்தகைமை யடையார். 
சான்றாண்மை சாயல் ஒழுக்கம் இவைமூன்றும் 
வான்தோய் குடிப்பிறந்தார்க் கல்லது — வான்தோயும் 
மைதவழ் வெற்ப! படாஅ பெருஞ்செல்வம்
 எய்தியக் கண்ணும் பிறர்க்கு. 
The high-born only have perfect excellence, greatness, and good manners. 
Lord of the hills traversed by clouds that touch the heavens! true excellence, and dignity, and good conduct, — these three things belong to men of race that touches heaven, and not to others, even though they may have acquired great wealth. 

143. குடிப்பிறந்தவர்க்கே அடக்கம் உரியது. 
இருக்கை எழலும் எதிர்செலவும் ஏனை 
விடுப்ப ஒழிதலோ டின்ன — குடிப்பிறந்தார் 
குன்றா ஒழுக்கமாக் கொண்டார் ; கயவரோ 
டொன்றா உணரற்பாற் றன்று. 
The noble only have an instinctive sense of propriety. Rising from their seat (at the approach of worshipful persons), going forth to meet them, departing when they dismiss, and such - like things, the well born maintain as invariable decorum. The low understand not one of these things. 

144. நற்குடிப் பிறப்பினால் நற்பண்பு சேரும்.
நல்லவை செய்யின் இயல்பாகும் தீயவை 
பல்லவர் தூற்றும் பழியாகும் — எல்லாம் 
உணருங் குடிப்பிறப்பின் மதியம் என்னோ 
புணரும் ஒருவர்க் கெனின். 
Noble birth makes duty easy. 
If men (of noble birth) do good things it is natural to them. As to evil things (to commit these is impossible to them); for this would be guilt which many would bruit abroad. What greater good then can accrue to men than high-birth, if it be their lot, to which the perception of all (these things) belongs! 

145. தீச்செயல்கள் செய்வதற்கு அஞ்சுவர் நற்குடியிற் பிறந்தோர். 
கல்லாமை அச்சம் கயவர் தொழில்அச்சம் 
சொல்லாமை யுள்ளும்ஓர் சோர்வச்சம் — எல்லாம் 
இரப்பார்க்கொன் றீயாமை அச்சம் மரத்தார்இம் 
மாணாக் குடிப்பிறந் தார். 
These four pious fears exist only among the really worthy. 
Dread of unlearned ignorance; dread of the work that base men do; dread of forgetful slip in words which one must not utter; dread of not giving to those that ask: those who are born of a race not so distinguished by conscientious fears are as trees. 

146. இனியசொல் , ஈகை முதலிய நற்குணங்கள் குடிப்பிறந்தோர் இடத்திருக்கும். 
இனநன்மை இன்சொலொன் றீதல்மற் றேனை 
மன நன்மை எனறிவை யெல்லாம் — கனமணி 
மூத்தோ டிமைக்கும் முழங்குவரித் தண்சேர்ப்ப 
இற்பிறந்தார் கண்ணே யுள. 
The fine qualities of the high-born. 
Lord of the roaring salt-sea's cool shore, where gleam rare gems with pearls!Association with the good, pleasant speech, a liberal hand, and purity of mind, —all these are only found among the nobly born. 

147. குடிப்பிறந்தவர் துன்பம் வந்தாலும் நற்செயலே புரிவர் 
செய்கை யழிந்து சிதல்மண்டிற் றாயினும் 
பெய்யா ஒருசிறை பேரில் உடைத்தாகும்; 
எவ்வம் உழந்தக் கடைத்தும் குடிப்பிறந்தார் 
செய்வர் செயற்பா லவை. 
High-born men do their duty always. 
Though its frame-work has perished, and thronging white ants infest it, in a spacious mansion some room will still afford shelter from the rain. Thus, although want annoys them, the nobly born even yet will do what should be done. 

148. குடிப்பிறந்தார் வறுமையிலும் பிறர்க்குதவி புரிவார். 
ஒருபுடை பாம்பு கொளினும் ஒருபுடை 
அங்கண்மா ஞாலம் விளக்குறூஉம் — திங்கள்போல் 
செல்லாமை செவ்வன்நேர் நிற்பினும் ஒப்புரவிற் 
கொல்கார் குடிப்பிறந் தார். 
The moon when half in the serpent's mouth still gives light. 
Like the moon which affords light to the fair and spacious earth with one side, while the dragon holds the other, the nobly born do not become remiss in works of seemly benevolence, though poverty (inability) stand fronting them.

149. கீழ்மக்கள் செல்வத்திலும் உதவி செய்யார். 
செல்லா இடத்தும் குடிப்பிறந்தார் செய்வன 
செல்லிடத்தும் செய்யார் சிறியவர் — புல்வாய் 
பருமம் பொறுப்பினும் பாய்பரி மாபோல் 
பொருமுரண் ஆற்றுதல் இன்று. 
The deer becomes not a charger. 
Men of mean descent, even when all goes well with them, will not perform the good deeds that the well-born will do, even when things do not go well with them. 
Though the antelope should bear a pillion, it rushes not to war like the prancing charger. 

150. தம்மையடைந்தவரைத் தாங்குவர் குடிப்பிறந்தோர். 
எற்றொன்றும் இல்லா விடத்தும் குடிப்பிறந்தார் 
அற்றுத்தற் சேர்ந்தார்க் கசைவிடத்து ஊற்றாவர் 
அற்றக் கடைத்தும் அகல்யா றகழ்ந்தக்கால் 
தெற்றெனத் தெண்ணீர் படும். 
The noble even in poverty afford aid do those who seek it. 
The nobly born, even when destitute, are props in time of feebleness to the needy ones that draw nigh to them. So, when the wide river is dry, if you dig in its bed, forth with clear waters gush out. 
-------------

16. மேன்மக்கள்  /Ch. 16. Great Men    

151. சிறு குற்றமும் மேன்மக்களிடம் சேராது. 
அங்கண் விசும்பின் அசல்நிலாப் பாரிக்குந்
திங்களும் சான்றோரும் ஒப்பர்மன் — திங்கள் 
மறுவாற்றும் சான்றோர் அஃ தாற்றார் தெருமந்து 
தேய்வர் ஒருமா சுறின். 
The good cannot endure a stain. 
The moon that diffuses light through heaven's fair realms, and truly worthy men are alike: yet that endures a spot, while the truly worthy endure it. not; — perplexed and sad they pine away if but one stain appear. 

152. அருமையான செயல்களையே மேன்மக்கள் செய்வர். 
இசையும் எனினும் இசையா தெனினும் 
வசைதீர எண்ணுவர் சான்றோர் — விசையின் 
நரிமா வுளங்கிழித்த அம்பினில் தீதோ 
அரிமாப் பிழைப்பெய்த கோல். 
Aim high! Better miss a lion, than hit a jackal 
Whether success attend, or do not attend the work, the excellent will even ponder blameless ends.—Is the shaft that missed the lion worse than the arrow sent forth, that with its impulse pierced the jackal's heart?

153. மேலோர் வறுமையிலும் செய்யத்தக்கவற்றையே செய்வார். 
நரம்பெழுந்து நல்கூர்ந்தா ராயினும் சான்றோர் 
குரம்பெழுந்து குற்றங்கொண் டேறார் — உரம்கவறா 
உள்ளமெனும் நாரினாற் கட்டி உளவரையால் 
செய்வர் செயற்பா லவை. 
The excellent are not led by want to commit evil. 
The excellent though emaciated and poor, do not transgress the limits of virtue and commit evil. With wisdom for the pillar, with perseverance as the band, they bind (the mind); and as long as they live they do what it behoves them to do.

154. மேலோரை ஒரு நாட் கண்டாலும் பழமை நண்பராவர். 
செல்வுழிக் கண்ஒருநாள் காணினும் சான்றவர் 
தொல்வழிக் கேண்மையின் தோன்றப் புரிந்தியாப்பர் 
நல்வரை நாட! சிலநாள் அடிப்படின் 
கல்வரையும் உண்டாம் நெறி. 
The good never forget even a casual acquaintance. 
Lord of the land of goodly hills ! —If trodden for a few days a path is formed over even the craggy hill; so excellent persons, though they have seen (worthy) men only for one day, as they were travelling, will bind them to their soul, exhibiting all the marks of an ancient friendship. 

155. கல்லார் உரையையும் நல்லோர் கேட்பார். 
புல்லா எழுத்தின் பொருளில் வறுங்கோட்டி 
கல்லா ஒருவன் உரைப்பவும், கண்ணோடி 
நல்லார் வருந்தியுங் கேட்பரே; மற்றவன் 
பல்லாருள் நாணல் பரிந்து. 
The good listen with patient courtesy to the orations of the ignorant. 
Even when one speaks who has an ungrammatical knowledge of the letter, but not of the meaning who is of a low (empty) school, and is unlearned the good with kindly compassion will listen, though it is pain to them, being grieved that he should be put to shame in the presence of many. 

156. வைதாலும் சான்றோர் வடுவுரை கூறார். 
கடித்துக் கரும்பினைக் கண்தகர நூறி 
இடித்துநீர் கொள்ளினும் இன்சுவைத்தே ஆகும் 
வடுப்பட வைதுஇறந்தக் கண்ணும் குடிப்பிறந்தார் 
கூறார் தம் வாயிற் சிதைந்து. 
Sugar-cane, crush it as you will, is ever sweet. 
Although you bite the sugar-cane, crush it till its joints are broken, grind it, and express its juice, it still will be sweet. The highly born, even when men have passed by abusing them so as to wound, never lose their self-respect so as to utter from their mouth (words of abuse). 

157. மேலோர் பொய் முதலிய பாவங்களில் எதுவும் செய்யார். 
கள்ளார்கள் உண்ணார் கடிவ கடிந்தொரீஇ 
எள்ளிப் பிறரை இகழ்ந்துரையார் — தள்ளியும் 
வாயின்பொய் கூறார் வடுவறு காட்சியார் 
சாயின் பரிவ திலர். 
The wise free from gross evils. 
They defraud not, drink not palm-wine, shun what is forbidden, never despise and speak contemptuously of their neighbours, nor even forgetfully do they utter anything untrue with their mouth : these men of faultless vision grieve not though they fall into distress. 

158. பிறர்மறை கேளாமை, பிறர்மனை விழையாமை , புறங்கூறாமை இம்மூன்றும் சிறந்த நல்லொழுக்கங்கள். 
பிறர்மறை யின்கண் செவிடாய்த் தீய 
ஏதிலார் இல்கண் குருடனாய்த் திறன்அறிந்து 
புறங்கூற்றின் மூகையாய் நிற்பானேல் யாதும் 
அறங்கூற வேண்டா அவற்கு. 
When a man should be deaf, blind, and dumb. 
Deaf to others' secrets, blind to his neighbour's wife, dumb to evil backbiting—if, knowing what is befitting, a man thus abides, it is not necessary to teach him any virtuous precepts. 

159. மேன் மக்களிடத்திற் பல நாட் சென்றாலும் முதனாட் கண்டதுபோலவே மதிப்பார். 
பன்னாளும் சென்றக்கால் பண்பிலார் தம் உழை 
என்னானும் வேண்டுப என்றிகழ்ப — என்னானும் 
வேண்டினும் நன்றுமற் றென்று விழுமியோர் 
காண்டொறும் செய்வர் சிறப்பு. 
Seek the good they are always kind. 
They who are destitute of kindly courtesy, even after the lapse of many days, will contemn (those that visit them), saying, ‘they will ask something of us'. The excellent will treat them with distinction whenever they see them, saying, ‘if they ask something of us, it is well'. 

160. மேன்மக்களைச் சார்ந்தவர் மேன்மை அடைவார். 
உடையார் இவர்என் றொருதலையாப் பற்றிக் 
கடையாயர் பின்சென்று வாழ்வர் — உடைய 
பிலம்தலைப் பட்டது போலாதே, நல்ல 
குலம்தலைப் பட்ட இடத்து. 
The treasure cave. 
The lowest sort of men say, there are men of property,’— cling to them steadily, follow them, and so flourish. Is it not as when a mine of treasure has been found, when men of good lineage have become our friends. 
--------------

17. பெரியாரைப் பிழையாமை / Ch. 17. Avoidance of Offence to the Great  


161. பெரியவர் வெறுத்தால் பின் திருப்ப (பேர்க்க) முடியாது. 
பொறுப்பரென் றெண்ணிப் புரைதீர்ந்தார் மாட்டும் 
வெறுப்பன செய்யாமை வேண்டும் — வெறுத்தபின் 
ஆர்க்கும் அருவி அணிமலை நல்நாட! 
பேர்க்குதல் யார்க்கும் அரிது. 
It is difficult to regain the forfeited favour of good men. 
Lord of the pleasant land whose hills resounding water-falls adorn ! — You may not even to faultless men do things that enkindle wrath; for when their wrath is once kindled, it is hard for any one to change their mood. 

162. அறிவில்லாதவர் பெரியவரை அடுத்திருந்தாலும் பயன்பெறார். 
பொன்னே கொடுத்தும் புணர்தற் கரியாரைக் 
கொன்னே தலைக்கூடப் பெற்றிருந்தும் — அன்னோ 
பயனில் பொழுதாக் கழிப்பரே நல்ல 
நயமில் அறிவி னவர். 
Waste of golden opportunities. 
Although those whose (pretended) wisdom is without moral excellence have gained access to men to whom approach is difficult even by gifts of gold alas! they pass away (the precious moments) as mere waste time. 

163. பெரியவர் மதிப்பதுவே மதிப்பாகும். 
அவமதிப்பும் ஆன்ற மதிப்பும் இரண்டும் 
மிகைமக்க ளான்மதிக்கற் பால — நயமுணராக் 
கையறியா மாக்கள் இழிப்பும் எடுத்தேத்தும் 
வையார் வடித்த நூலார். 
Praise and dispraise of noble persons only of importance. 
Both disesteem and thorough esteem are in the class of things that depend on the estimation of the great. Those who have a discriminating knowledge of true science, lay no stress on either the abuse or the fulsome praise of man who comprehend not moral principles, and know not the rules of propriety. 

164. பெரியவர் சினந்தாற் பிழைப்பது அரிது. 
விரிநில நாகம் விடருள தேனும் 
உருமின் கடுஞ்சினம் சேணின்றும் உட்கும் 
அருமை உடைய அரண்சேர்ந்தும் உய்யார் 
பெருமை உடையார் செறின். 
None safe from the wrath of the great. 
The serpent rich of hue, though it dwell in the mountain-cleft, from far is frighted by the thunderbolt's fierce wrath; so men escape not though hid in strongholds hard to reach, when those great in virtue are wroth. 

165. தம்மைத் தாமே மதித்துக்கொள்வது மதிப்பாகாது 
எம்மை அறிந்திலின் எம்போல்வர் இல்லென்று 
தம்மைத்தாம் கொள்வது கோளன்று — தம்மை 
அரியரா நோக்கி அரன்அறியுஞ் சான்றோர் 
பெரியராக் கொள்வது கோள். 
Self-praise is no commendation. 
‘You know not all our worth, for equals have we none:’ when self thus estimates itself, this is not ‘esteem’ ! When perfect men, proficients in virtue, regard any as dear, and esteem them as great, this is ‘esteem’ !

166. பெரியவர் கேண்மை நாளுக்கு நாள் பெருகும். 
நளிகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! நாள்நிழல் போல 
விளியும் சிறியவர் கேண்மை — விளிவின்றி 
அல்கு நிழல்போல் அகன்றகன் றோடுமே 
தொல்புக ழாளர் தொடர்பு. 
Morning and evening shadows. 
Lord of the great sea’scool margin !—Friendships formed with mean men dwindling die like shadows of the morn; friendship of men of old renown as shadows of the after-day will lengthen out and grow.

167. மன்னர் செல்வமும் மங்கையர் இன்பமும் அடுத்தவர் அடைவார். 
மன்னர் திருவும் மகளிர் எழில்நலமும் 
துன்னியார் துய்ப்பர் தகல்வேண்டா — துன்னிக் 
குழைகொண்டு தாழ்ந்த குளிர்மர மெல்லாம் 
உழைதங்கட் சென்றார்க் கொருங்கு. 
To those who cultivate them fruits accrue. 
Those who press their suit, fitness a part, enjoy the wealth of kings, and the charms of maidens fair; so all the cool (shady) trees that droop earthward with thick foliage, give room to those that thronging seek their shelter. 

168. யாரிடத்தும் நட்புக் கொள்ளாமை நன்று. 
தெரியத் தெரியுந் தெரிவிலார் கண்ணும் 
பிரியப் பெரும்படர்நோய் செய்யும் — பெரிய 
உலவா இருங்கழிச் சேர்ப்ப!யார் மாட்டுங் 
கலவாமை கோடி உறும். 
Friendship brings pangs of severance. 
Severance from even those who have no under standing [lit. no understanding that understands (so as) to understand] causes great and spreading sorrow. — Lord of the shore of the great, unfailing, swelling bay !—To be intimate with none is ten million times the best.

169. நற்செயல் புரிந்த நானே பயன்பட்ட நான். 
கல்லாது போகிய நாளும் பெரியவர்கட் 
செல்லாது வைகிய வைகலும் — ஒல்வ 
கொடாஅ தொழிந்த பகலும் உரைப்பிற் 
படாஅவாம் பண்புடையார் கண். 
No day unimproved. 
Days gone by without learning, those passed without any intercourse with the great, those spent without giving what is fitting;— in the case of the excellent, if you tell them over, none such occur. 

170. பெரியோர்க்கும் பணிவு, அறிஞர்க்கு அடக்கம், செல்வர்க்குக் கொடை சிறப்பைத் தரும். 
பெரியார் பெருமை சிறுதகைமை ஒன்றிற் 
குரியார் உரிமை அடக்கம் — தெரியுங்கால் 
செல்வ முடையாரும் செல்வரே தற்சேர்ந்தார் 
அல்லல் களைப வெனின். 
Humility. Self-restraint. Charity. 
The greatness of the great is [the quality of littleness (in their own sight), i. e.] humility; the (real) acquisition of those who have acquired (any). one (science) is modest self-restraint. If you rightly understand things, those possessors of wealth only are really wealthy who relieve the wants of those that approach them (as suppliants). 
----------------

18. நல்லினஞ்சேர்தல்  /Ch. 18. Association with the Good  

171. நல்லோரைச் சார்ந்தால் தீயகுணம் நீங்கும். 
அறியாப் பருவத் தடங்காரோ டொன்றி 
நெறியல்ல செய்தொழுகி யவ்வும் - நெறியறிந்த 
நற்சார்வு சாரக் கெடுமே வெயில்முறுகப் 
புற்பனிப் பற்றுவிட்  டாங்கு.
Good companionship cures the follies of youth. 
In youth unwise, though men consort with haughty ones and walk in lawless ways; yet, when they join with those that know the righteous path, their faults shall melt away as dew from off the grass when sunbeams scorch.

172. பெரியார் வாய்ச்சொற்கேட்டு அறநெறியறிந்து வாழ்க. 
அறிமின் அறநெறி அஞ்சுமின் கூற்றம் 
பொறுமின் பிறர்கடுஞ்சொல் போற்றுமின் வஞ்சம் 
வெறுமின் வினைதீயார் கேண்மையெஞ் ஞான்றும் 
பெறுமின் பெரியார்வாய்ச் சொல். 
Six precepts. 
Know virtue's path ! Dread death! Beat others' words severe! Beware ye practise no deceit! Friendship detest with men of evil deeds! Daily get gain of words that fall from greatmen's lips! 

173. பிறவித் துன்பத்தை வெறுத்த பெரியவர் உறவுகொள்க. 
அடைந்தார்ப் பிரிவும் அரும்பிணியும் கேடும் 
உடங்குடம்பு கொண்டார்க் குறலால் — தொடங்கிப் 
பிறப்பின்னா தென்றுணரும் பேரறிவி னாரை 
உறப்புணர்க அம்மாஎன் நெஞ்சு . 
Life has many evils. Attach yourself to the wise. 
Severance of close-joined friends and sore disease and death, all these combined hap to those that have assumed a human body: so the truly wise have felt that birth, from the very first, is bitterness. Ah! soul, cleave close to these! 

174. நல்லோர் நட்பு இருந்தால் பிறப்பில் வெறுப்புக் கொள்ளார்.
இறப்ப நினையுங்கால் இன்னா தெனினும் 
பிறப்பினை யாரும் முனியார் — பிறப்பினும் 
பண்பாற்று நெஞ்சத் தவர்களோ டெஞ்ஞான்றும் 
நண்பாற்றி நட்கப் பெறின். 
Friendship makes life endurable. 
Though when you ponder it, it is surpassing: bitterness, none hate (this mortal) birth, if in (this mortal) birth they ever perform friendly acts to men whose hearts are set on noble excellence, and gain their friendship. 

175. மாட்சியுடையாரைச் சேர்ந்தோர் மலைபோல் நிற்பர். 
ஊரங் கணநீர் உரவுநீர் சேர்ந்தக்கால் 
பேரும் பிறிதாகித் தீர்த்தமாம் — ஓருங் 
குலமாட்சி யில்லாரும் குன்றுபோல் நிற்பர் 
நலமாட்சி நல்லாரைச் சார்ந்து. 
The water from the sewer becomes a sacred stream. 
When water from the town-sewers has joined the great river its very name is changed, and it becomes a 'sacred stream’. Ponder well! Even those who have no greatness of clan, if they ally themselves with good men of goodly fame, shall stand firm as a hill. 

176. பெரியவரைச் சேர்ந்தோர் பெருமை யடைவார். 
ஒண்கதிர் வாள்மதியம் சேர்தலால் ஓங்கிய 
அங்கண் விசும்பின் முயலும் தொழப்படூஉம் 
குன்றிய சீர்மையராயினும் சீர்பெறுவர் 
குன்றன்னார் கேண்மை கொளின். 
The hare in the moon is worshipped. 
Because it is in the bright-beamed moon the very hare in heaven's lofty fair expanse is worshipped. Though scant their worthiness, men obtain worth who share friendship with those firm as a hill. 

177. பெருமையுடையவரைச் சார்ந்தாற் சிறுமை நீங்கும். 
பாலோ டளாயநீர் பாலாகும் அல்லது 
நீராய் நிறந்தெரிந்து தோன்றாதாம் — தேரின் 
சிறியார் சிறுமையும் தோன்றாதாம் நல்ல 
பெரியார் பெருமையைச் சார்ந்து. 
Water with milk seems milk. 
Commingled with milk water becomes milk; at least, it shows no more as water by its hue. Look close, the mean men's meanness shows not if they join themselves to greatness of the good and great. 

178. ஆற்றலுடையவரைச் சார்ந்தோர் யாவர்க்கும் அஞ்சார். 
கொல்லை யிரும்புனத்துக் குற்றி யடைந்தபுல் 
ஒல்காவே யாகும் உழவர் உழுபடைக்கு 
மெல்லியரே யாயினும் நற்சார்வு சார்ந்தார்மேல் 
செல்லாவாம் செற்றார் சினம். 
The society of the good a protection. 
Grass close around the stump in the field adjoining the house will not be destroyed by the ploughshare of the farmer ; [thus] though men are weak, if they get under safe protection, the wrath of their foes will not reach them. 

179. தீயவர் இனம் சேர்ந்தால் நற்பண்பு நீங்கும். 
நிலநலத்தால் நந்திய நெல்லேபோல் தத்தம் 
குலநலத்தால் ஆகுவர் சான்றோர் — கலநலத்தைத் 
தீவளி சென்று சிதைத்தாங்குச் சான்றாண்மை 
தீயினம் சேரக் கெடும். 
Good tribal associations maintain excellence, and evil ones wreck it. 
As Nel that flourishes through the goodness of the soil, good men become illustrious by the excellence of their respective clanships. 
Goodness perishes when it comes near evil associates, as the tornado advances and destroys the excellence of the ship. 

180. தீயவரோடு சேர்ந்தவரும் கெடுவார். 
மனத்தான் மறுவில ரேனுந்தாஞ் சேர்ந்த 
இனத்தால் இகழப் படுவர் — புனத்து 
வெறிகமழ் சந்தனமும் வேங்கையும் வேமே 
எறிபுனந் தீப்பட்டக் கால். 
Evil association brings ruin. 
Though themselves pure in mind, even good men incur contempt because of their associations. So in the woodland glade when a conflagration takes place (not the worthless brushWood only, but) the fragrant Sandal and Vengai too are consumed. 
--------------

19. பெருமை  / Ch. 19. (Moral) Greatness  

181. பேராசை நீக்கியவரே பெருமை யுடையவர். 
ஈத லிசையா திளமைசேண் நீங்குதலால் 
காத லவருங் கருத்தல்லர் — காதலித் 
தாதும்நாம் என்னும் அவாவினைக் கைவிட்டுப் 
போவதே போலும் பொருள். 
Renunciation of desire is ‘greatness.' 
To give is no longer ours; and youth is gone far off ; our once beloved ones think of us no more! To depart, having abandoned 'desire' that bids us love and hope for future joys, appears the thing that's meet. 

182. வாழ்வு நிலையெனக் கருதி அறிவில்லார் மயங்குவார். 
இற்சார்வின் ஏமாந்தேம் ஈங்கமைந்தேம் என்றெண்ணிப் 
பொச்சாந் தொழுகுவர் பேதையார் — அச்சார்வு 
நின்றன போன்று நிலையா எனவுணர்ந்தார் 
என்றும் பரிவ திலர். 
Fools make their home in a changing world. 
Fools thinking 'we have found joy in the refuge of home,' and 'we are here in perfect repose, forgetful (of the instability of all things), go on their way. 
Those who have felt that 'refuge' is unstable, while it seems to stand fast, never fix their fond desire (on it). 

183. அறிஞர் அறம்புரிந்து வாழ்வார் 
மறுமைக்கு வித்து மயலின்றிச் செய்து 
சிறுமைப் படாதேநீர் வாழ்மின் — அறிஞராய் 
நின்றுழி நின்றே நிறம்வேறாங் காரணம்
இன்றிப் பலவும் உள். 
Seek the unchanging. All things here change. 
See that ye sow seed that in other world may germinate; free your lives from earth's bewilder-ment and meanness ; stand in your lot as wise men; the changing hue of things shall without cause fade, and many things be new. 

184. பெரியோர்போலச் சிறியோர் அறம் செய்யார். 
உறைப்பருங் காலத்தும் ஊற்றுநீர்க் கேணி 
இறைத்துணினும் ஊராற்றும் என்பர் கொடைக்கடனுஞ் 
சாஅயக் கண்ணும் பெரியார்போன் மற்றையார் 
ஆஅயக் கண்ணும் அரிது. 
Good men are unfailing fountains of beneficence. 
The well of springing water serves the town that draws and drinks, even in time when rains are scant; so great men in adverse hour dispense due gifts that others give not even in their best estate. 

185. செல்வம் கெடினும் பெரியோர் அறஞ்செய்தே வாழ்வார். 
உறுபுனல் தந்துல கூட்டி அறுமிடத்தும் 
கல்லூற் றுழியூறும் ஆறேபோற் - செல்வம் 
பலர்க்காற்றிக் கெட்டுலந்தக் கண்ணுஞ் சிலர்க்காற்றிச் 
செய்வர் செயற்பா லவை. 
Great men do not neglect dutiesbecause of poverty. 
The river pours forth a mighty stream and feeds the world; and when it is dried up, if men dig in its bed, streams gush out! So good men when rich, give to many; and, when ruined, give still at least to some, and do what should be done. 

186. சிறியோர் செய்யுந் தீமைகள் தெரியாமல் மறையும். 
பெருவரை நாட பெரியார்கண் தீமை 
கருநரைமேற் சூடேபோல் தோன்றும் — கருநரையைக் 
கொன்றன்ன இன்னா செயினும் சிறியார்மேல் 
ஒன்றானும் தோன்றா கெடும்.
Faults are conspicuous in great persons. 
Lord of the lofty hills! Any evil in men of moral greatness shows like a brand on a mighty bull; but although mean men do painful deeds, like the slaughter of that same mighty bull, none of these attracts attention. 

187. பெரியோர் பகையினும் சிறியோர் நட்பே தீமை விளைக்கும். 
இசைந்த சிறுமை இயல்பிலா தார்கட் 
பசைந்த துணையும் பரிவாம் — அசைந்த 
நகையேயும் வேண்டாத நல்லறிவினார்கட் 
பகையேயும் பாடு பெறும். 
Enmity of the wise better than friendship of the mean.
In proportion to the degree of one's intimacy with men essentially mean and without good qualities sorrow accrues; but even the hostility of those who do not desire forbidden things even in jest will confer dignity. 

188. பொய்யருக்குப் பொய்யாகவும் மெய்யருக்கு மெய்யாகவும் நடப்பது நன்று. 
மெல்லிய நல்லாருள் மென்மை அதுவிறந்து 
ஒன்னாருட் கூற்றுக்கும் உட்குடைமை எல்லாஞ் 
சலவருட் சாலச் சலமே நலவருள் 
நன்மை வரம்பாய் விடல். 
Be all things to all men. 
With gentle fair ones use gentleness surpassing theirs; with foes display a wrath that death's self might dread; with persistent men show a persistency to match ; amongst men of good do good; let the law of life be thus laid down. 

189. பெரியோர் புறங்கூற்றைக் கேட்பினும் மனம் வேறுபடார். 
கடுக்கி ஒருவன் கடுங்குறளை பேசி 
மயக்கி விடினும் மனப்பிரிப்பொன் றின்றித் 
துளக்க மிலாதவர் தூய மனத்தார் 
விளக்கினுள் ஒண்சுடரே போன்று.
The great men is unmoved amid insults. 
These are the pure in heart who, though any vex, and with use of slanderous words would fain perplex them, with calm unruffled mind abide unwavering, like the bright flame within the lamp. 

190. வந்தவர்க்கு உணவு கொடுத்துப் பின் உண்டு மகிழ்வார் பெரியோர். 
முற்றுற்றுந் துற்றினை நாளும் அறஞ்செய்து 
பிற்றுற்றுத் துற்றுவர் சான்றவர் — அத்துற்று 
முக்குற்றம் நீக்கி முடியும் அளவெல்லாம் 
துக்கத்துள் நீக்கி விடும். 
Feeding the hungry. 
The excellent will daily give to the needy in charity their first-served food; they themselves will eat what is served after: such good conduct removes the three faults, and from sorrow sets men free, through all the days, till comes the end. 
---------------

20. தாளாண்மை    / Ch. 20. Persevering Energy  

191. முயற்சியுடையவர் முதன்மையாக வாழ்வார். 
கோளாற்றக் கொள்ளாக் குளத்தின்கீழ்ப் பைங்கூழ்போல் 
கேள்ஈவ துண்டு கிளைகளோ துஞ்சுப
வாளாடு கூத்தியர் கண்போல் தடுமாறும் 
தாளாளர்க் குண்டோ தவறு.
Active independence. 
As for kindred that feed upon what relatives give them they will die off like green grain below a tank, which does not hold a sufficient supply (of water). 
Is failure possible to men of energy that are quick in movement as the eyes of those who perform the sword-dance ? 

192. தாழ்விலா முயற்சி தலைவனாகச் செய்யும். 
ஆடுகோ டாகி அதரிடை நின்றதூஉம் 
காழ் கொண்ட கண்ணே களிறணைக்குங் கந்தாகும்; 
வாழ்தலும் அன்ன தகைத்தே ஒருவன்றான் 
தாழவின்றித் தன்னைச் செயின். 
By energy a man makes himself. 
What once stood by the wayside, a twig that bent to every touch, when its core is developed within, may become a stake to which they tie an elephant. Life too is thus, if man himself, unfailing make himself ! 

193. முயற்சியுடைவனுக்குச் சிறுதொழிலும் பெருந்தொழிலாம். 
உறுபுலி ஊனிரை இன்றி ஒருநாள் 
சிறுதேரை பற்றியும் தின்னும் — அறிவினால் 
கால்தொழில் என்று கருதற்க கையினால் 
மேல்தொழிலும் ஆங்கே மிகும். 
Stoop to conquer. 
The huge tiger, when lacking flesh for food one day, may even seize a little frog and eat it. Think not 'By (all my) knowledge I only gain menial tasks;" to the skillful hand nobler employments shall even there abound. 

194. சோர்வு இன்றித் தொழில் புரிவதுதான் ஆண்மை. 
இசையா தெனினும் இயற்றியோர் ஆற்றால் 
அசையாது நிற்பதாம் ஆண்மை — இசையுங்கால் 
கண்டல் திரையலைக்கும் கானலம் தண்சேர்ப்ப 
பெண்டிரும் வாழாரோ மற்று. 
Manliness is perseverance in spite of failure. 
Manliness is working on, in no wise faltering, remaining stedfast though the matter succeed not. When all is successful,— Lord of the cool lovely shore, in whose groves the waves agitate the scented thorn, — will not even women live and flourish? 

195 கல்வி, செல்வம், தவம், முயற்சி இவையிருந்தால் உயர்குலம் ஆகும். 
நல்ல குலமென்றும் தீய குலமென்றும் 
சொல்லள வல்லால் பொருளில்லை — தொல்சிறப்பின் 
ஒண்பொருள் ஒன்றோ தவம்கல்வி ஆள்வினை 
என்றிவற்றான் ஆகுங் குலம். 
What is good or bad caste ? 
When men speak of 'good caste' and 'bad caste' it is a mere form of speech, and has no real meaning. Not even by possessions, made splendid by ancient glories, but by self-denial, learning, and energy is Caste determined. 

196. முயற்சியை முடிவிற்காட்டுவோரே முதன்மையுடையவர். 
ஆற்றுந் துணையும் அறிவினை உள்ளடக்கி 
ஊக்கம் உரையார் உணர்வுடையார் — ஊக்கம் 
உறுப்பினால் ஆராயும் ஒண்மை யுடையார் 
குறிப்பின்கீழ்ப் பட்ட துலகு. 
Reserve as to your own plans, and skill in detecting those of others. 
Till the time for action comes men of understanding keep close within themselves their wisdom and speak not of their designs (ஊக்கம் = What they are labouring to effect). 
The world is subject to the nod of the brilliant (diplomatists) who search out (and know) men's designs from outward indications (lit. from) their members, i.e. from eye, gesture, tone, expression etc.). 

197. தந்தை தளர்ந்தால் மைந்தன் தாங்கவேண்டும். 
சிதலை தினப்பட்ட ஆல மரத்தை 
மதலையாய் மற்றதன் வீரூன்றி யாங்குக் 
குதலைமை தந்தைகண் தோன்றில்தான் பெற்ற 
புதல்வன் மறைப்பக் கெடும். 
The worthy son conceals his sire's defects, and sustains his weakness. 
If the banyan's trunk be eaten by the gnawing ant, its 'branch root' bears it up, like a buttress; even so, when decay appears in the sire, the son he has begotten shall hide it, and weakness is no more. 

198. அழிக்கத்தக்க செயலைப் பண்புடையோர் செய்யார். 
ஈனமாய் இல்லிருந் தின்றி விளியினும் 
மானந் தலைவருவ செய்பவோ — யானை 
வரிமுகம் புண்படுக்கும் வள்ளுகிர் நோன்றாள் 
அரிமா மதுகை யவர். 
Poverty but not dishonour. 
The lion's pointed claw and mighty foot will wound the spotted face of an elephant; those who have power like his , — though bereft of all, they die in want within their home, — will they do deeds that bring disgrace? 

199. பேராண்மை இன்றெனிற் பிறப்பாற் பயனில்லை. 
தீங்கரும் பீன்ற திரள்கால் உளையலரி 
தேங்கமழ் நாற்றம் இழந்தார்அங்கு — ஓங்கும் 
உயர்குடி யுட்பிறப்பி னென்னாம் பெயர்பொறிக்கும் 
பேராண்மை யில்லாக் கடை. 
High birth useless without lofty energies. 
Like the flowers on a rounded stalk, with hair like filaments that sweet cane bare, when the sweet fragrance they breathed is lost, what gain accrues from birth in a lofty noble house when energy that makes the name noteworthy, is wanting?

200. உழைப்பாற் கிடைத்த உணவே உயர்ந்தது. 
பெருமுத் தரையர் பெரிதுவந் தீயுங் 
கருனைச்சோ றார்வர் கயவர் — கருனையைப் 
பேரும் அறியார் நனிவிரும்பு தாளாண்மை 
நீரும் அமிழ்தாய் விடும். 
The scant fare of the laborious is the diet of the gods. 
The base feed full of rice and savoury food, that men, great lords of the triple lands, with generous gladness give; but water won with willing strenuous toil by those who know, not savoury food by name even, will turn to nectar. 
-------------

21. சுற்றந்தழால்   /  Ch. 21. The Support of Kindred 

201. சுற்றத்தாரைக் கண்டால் துன்பம் நீங்கும். 
வயாவும் வருத்தமும் ஈன்றக்கால் நோவும் 
கவாஅன் மகற்கண்டு தாய்மறந் தாஅங்கு 
அசாஅத்தான் உற்ற வருத்தம் உசாஅத்தன் 
கேளிரைக் காணக் கெடும். 
Comfort from sympathy of kinsmen. 
As a mother when she sees her son upon her lap forgets the languors, the pains, and the throes of birth; so trouble arising from weakness will die when a man sees his sympathizing kinsmen around him. 

202. பல்லார் பயன்பெற நல்லாண்மகன் வாழ்வான்.
அழல்மண்டு போழ்தின் அடைந்தவர்கட் கெல்லாம் 
நிழல்மரம்போல் நேரொப்பத் தாங்கிப் — பழுமரம்போல் 
பல்லார் பயன்துய்ப்பத் தான்வருந்தி வாழ்வதே 
நல்லாண் மகற்குக் கடன். 
Good friends like trees that afford both shade and fruit. 
To yield ready protection alike to all, as a tree affords shade to those that seek its shelter when the heat grows fierce; and to live toiling so that many may enjoy the gain, resembling thus a fruit producing tree, is the duty of the manly man. 

203. தற்சேர்ந்தவரைத் தாங்குவர் பெரியோர். 
அடுக்கல் மலைநாட தற்சேர்ந்  தவரை 
எடுக்கலாம் என்றார் பெரியோர் — அடுத்தடுத்து 
வன்காய் பலபல காய்ப்பினும் இல்லையே 
தன்காய் பொறுக்கலாக் கொம்பு. 
The magnanimous never refuse to support their kindred. The bough sustains all its fruits. 
Lord of the land where mountains piled on mountains rise! the great demur not to support their kith and kin ;—there is no bough but will support the fruit it bears, though clustered thick great fruits and many cling thereon.

204. சிற்றினத்தார் கேண்மை சிலநாள் நிற்கும். 
உலகறியத் தீரக் கலப்பினும் நில்லா 
சிலபகலாஞ் சிற்றினத்தார் கேண்மை — நிலைதிரியா 
நிற்கும் பெரியோர் நெறியடைய நின்றனைத்தால் 
ஒற்க மிலாளர் தொடர்பு. 
The friendship of the great alone is lasting. 
Though mingled in a complete intimacy so that all the world knows of it, the friendship of the little will last but little time. Connection with the firm unyielding men endures till the great one's path, who never swerve, is reached. 

205. பலர்துயர் தீர்ப்பவர் தலைவர் ஆவார். 
இன்னர் இனையர் எமர்பிறர் என்னுஞ்சொல் 
என்னும் இலராம் இயல்பினால் — துன்னித் 
தொலைமக்கள் துன்பந் தீர்ப் பாரேயார் மாட்டும் 
தலைமக்க ளாகற்பா லார். 
Universal benevolence. 
‘Such are they and so many;’ ‘these are ours; those strange :’  those worthy to be classed as chief of men say nothing like this ; so to speak is not their nature ; for they relieve the distress of ALL that troubled come to them! 

206. ஆருயிர் நண்பர்தரும் கூழும் அமுதமாம். 
பொற்கலத்துப் பெய்த புலியுகிர் வான்புழுக்கல் 
அக்காரம் பாலோ டமரார்கைத் துண்டலின் 
உப்பிலிப் புற்கை உயிர்போற் கிளைஞர்மாட்டு 
எக்காலத் தானும் இனிது. 
Hard fare with kindred, better than a feast without love. 
More sweet than rice, though white as tiger's claw with milk and sugar served on plate of gold, by loveless hands, is any tasteless mess, in any dish, when shared with kindred dear as life. 

207. பகைவர் மனையிற் பாற்சோறும் வேம்பாம். 
நாள்வாய்ப் பெறினுந்தந் நள்ளாதோர் இல்லத்து 
வேளாண்மை வெங்கருனை வேம்பாகும் — கேளாய் 
அபராணப் போழ்தின் அடகிடுவ ரேனுந் 
தமராயார் மாட்டே இனிது. 
Any food with foes bitter, with friends sweet.  
Most bitter (Margosa) is the bounteous meal of dainty food at early dawn in house of those who love us not. Hear thou! though not till evening given, the mess of herbs when eaten with our own is sweet. 

208. உற்றவிடத் துதவுவோர் நட்டவ ரென்பார். 
முட்டிகை போல முனியாது வைகலும் 
கொட்டியுண் பாருங் குறடுபோற் கைவிடுவர் 
சுட்டுக்கோல் போல எரியும் புகுவரே
நட்டா ரெனப்படு வார். 
Interested and disinterested friends.
Even those who, like the artificer's small hammer (with slight strokes fashioning the jewel), gently (முனியாது), day by day, moulding their patron to their will, eat his food, will drop him (when poverty assails him), as the pincers do the gold put into the crucible. Those worthy to be called friends are like the artificer's rod which enters the fire with it. 

209. இடர் மகிழ் வாருங்கே எய்துவர் நண்பர். 
நறுமலர்த் தண்கோதாய்! நட்டார்க்கு நட்டார் 
மறுமையுஞ் செய்வதொன் றுண்டோ — இறுமளவும் 
இன்புறுவ இன்புற் றெழீஇ அவரோடு 
துன்புறுவ துன்புறாக் கால். 
Sympathy in sorrow and in joy. 
O maid adorned with fresh garlands of fragrant flowers! is there one thing that even in other world, friends may perform for friends, if till they die, their joys they share, but shun to share their griefs ? 

210. விருப்பமில்லார் மனைப் பொரிக்கறியுணவும் வேம்பாகும். 
விருப்பிலா ரில்லத்து வேறிருந் துண்ணும் 
வெருக்குக்கண் வெங்கருனை வேம்பாம் — விருப்புடைத் 
தன்போல்வா ரில்லுள தயங்குநீர்த் தண்புற்கை 
என்போ டியைந்த அமிழ்து. 
Better fast with friends than feast with foes. 
The savoury fried curry, (in colour) like a cat's eye, which one eats seated a part in the house of those who are without affection, will be bitter as margosa; but cold gruel (weak and insipid), like clear water, in the house of affectionate equals, is ambrosia that cleaves to the bones. 
--------------

	22. நட்பாராய்தல்/Ch. 22. Scrutiny in Forming Friendships 

211. நாளுக்கு நாள் உயரும் நல்லோர் நட்பு. 
கருத்துணர்ந்து கற்றறிந்தார் கேண்மையெஞ் ஞான்றும் 
குருத்திற் கரும்புதின் றற்றே — குருத்திற்கு 
எதிர்செலத்தின் றன்ன தகைத்தரோ என்றும் 
மதுர மிலாளர் தொடர்பு. 
Satisfying friendships. 
Intimacy with those who understand the real intention (of one's words), and who have acquired wisdom by learning, will at all times be like eating sweet cane from the tender shoots; but attachment to those who have no sweetness of disposition is like eating it in a direction opposite to the tender shoot (it grows harder and less sweet). 

212. குடிப் பிறப்பறிந்தே நட்புக் கொள்க. 
இற்பிறப் பெண்ணி இடைதிரியார் என்பதோர் 
நற்புடை கொண்டமை யல்லது — பொற்கேழ் 
புனலொழுகப் புள்ளிரியும் பூங்குன்ற நாட! 
மனமறியப் பட்டதொன் றன்று. 
Examine the lineage of a candidate for your friendship. 
Lord of the land of flowery hills, where wild-fowl golden in hue fly, scared by the rush of the waterfall. 
Regarding the mobility of their birth—these will not swerve:—To say thus is a good ground of confidence—(a good position to take up); but to say ‘their minds are known,' is not any (i. e. real ground). 

213. நாய் போன்றவரே நட்பிற் சிறந்தவர். 
யானை அனையவர் நண்பொரீஇ நாயனையார் 
கேண்மை கெழீஇக் கொளல்வேண்டும் — யானை 
அறிந்தறிந்தும் பாகனையே கொல்லும் எறிந்தவேல் 
மெய்யதா வால்குழைக்கும் நாய். 
The elephant and the dog, types of false and true friends. 
Forsaking friendship with those who resemble the elephant, embrace and hold fast intimacy with those who are like the dog; for the elephant will slay even its keeper though it has long known him ; but the dog will wag its tail when it has in its body the javelin (hurled at it by its angry master). 

214. உள்ளங் கலந்தவர் உரிமை நண்புடையவர். 
பலநாளும் பக்கத்தா ராயினும் நெஞ்சிற் 
சிலநாளும் ஒட்டாரோ டொட்டார் — பலநாளும் 
நீத்தா ரெனக்கை விடலுண்டோ தந்நெஞ்சத்து 
யாத்தாரோ டியாத்த தொடர்பு. 
Friends are not to be forsaken because long severed 
Though men dwell side by side for many days when their souls cleave not (are not congenial) for even a few days they retain not their friendship. But is it possible to let go attachment's well-knit ties, though those to whom one's soul is knit dwell many days afar? 

215. சுருங்கா திருக்கும் சிறந்தவர் நட்பு. 
கோட்டுப்பூப் போல் மலர்ந்துபின் கூம்பாது 
வேட்டதே வேட்டதாம் நட்பாட்சி — தோட்ட 
கயப்பூப்போல் முன்மலர்ந்து பின்கூம்பு வாரை 
நயப்பாரும் நட்பாரும் இல். 
Tree-flowers and water-flowers. 
The use and wont of friendship is that, what once it has loved it loves always,— like the flower on the tree-branch which having once unfolded afterwards closes not; but who will esteem, or make friends of those who are like flowers on the surface of the excavated tank, which unfold and afterwards close themselves?

216. கமுகு தென்னை பனை போன்றது கடையிடை முதல் நட்பு. 
கடையாயார் நட்பிற் கமுகனையர் ஏனை 
இடையாயார் தெங்கின் அனையர் — தலையாயார் 
எண்ணரும் பெண்ணைபோன் றிட்டஞான் றிட்டதே 
தொன்மை உடையார் தொடர்பு. 
Three grades of friends. 
The lowest sort of men in friendship are like the Arecanut tree. The middle sort are like the cocoa-nut tree. Attachments to the chief of men — who are old friends —is like the Palmyra tree of rare worth : what was given that first day was given once for all. 

217. அன்பிலார் தந்த அமுதும் எட்டிக்காய். 
கழுநீருட் காரட கேனும் ஒருவன் 
விழுமிதாக் கொள்ளின் அமிழ்தம் — விழுமிய 
குய்த்துவையார் வெண்சோறே யாயினும் மேவாதார் 
கைத்துண்டல் காஞ்சிரங் காய். 
A dinner of herbs with affection is ambrosia. The greatest delicacies without it, nux vomica. 
If one receive you courteously, though what he gives is but rank herbs dressed in water in which rice had been washed, it is ambrosia. To eat from the hands of those who love us not, though it be white rice with rich spicy condiments, is nux vomica. 

218. வாய்க்கால் போன்றவர் நட்பை மருவுக. 
நாய்க்காற் சிறுவிரல்போல் நன்கணிய ராயினும் 
ஈக்கால் துணையும் உதவாதார் நட்பென்னாம் ? 
சேய்த்தானும் சென்று கொளல்வேண்டும் செய்விளைக்கும் 
வாய்க்காலனையார் தொடர்பு. 
Friendship of those who though near aid not. 
Of what value is the friendship of those who being very near like the little claw on a dog's leg, afford not help as much as a fly's foot? Though you go far to seek it, lay hold of the friendship of those who are like the water channel that causes the crops in the field to flourish. 

219. தெளிவிலார் நட்புக்கொள்வது தீதே. 
தெளிவிலார் நட்பிற் பகைநன்று சாதல் 
விளியா அருநோயின் நன்றால் — அளிய 
இகழ்தலின் கோறல் இனிதேமற் றில்ல 
புகழ்தலின் வைதலே நன்று. 
Four bad things. 
Better hate than friendship of the ignorant. Better death than disease which comes on yielding to no remedy. Sweeter is killing thin contempt that breaks the spirit. Better abuse than undeserved praise. 

220. தக்கவர் நட்பினை ஆய்ந்து சார்ந்திரு. 
மரீஇப் பலரோடு பன்னாள் முயங்கிப் 
பொரீஇப் பொருட்டக்கார்க் கோடலே வேண்டும் ; 
பரீஇ உயிர்செகுக்கும் பாம்பொடும் இன்னா 
மரீஇஇப் பின்னைப் பிரிவு. 
Never forsake a friend ! 
When men have formed an intimacy (மரீஇ) separation afterwards even from a snake which slays with its tooth (பரீஇ), causes affliction (இன்னா) therefore associate intimately with many, and for many days take them to your bosom, conform to their tastes and habits (பொரீஇ ), and hold fast the really worthy ones. 
-----------

	23. நட்பிற் பிழை பொறுத்தல் / Ch. 23. Bearing and Forbearing in Friendship


221. நட்பினர் பிழையை நல்லோர் பொறுப்பர். 
நல்லார் எனத்தாம் நனிவிரும்பிக் கொண்டாரை 
அல்லார் எனினும் அடக்கிக் கொளல்வேண்டும்; 
நெல்லுக் குமியுண்டு நீர்க்கு நுரையுண்டு 
புல்லிதழ் பூவிற்கு முண்டு. 
Bear with infirmities. None are perfect. 
When those to whom with strong desire we clung as good, prove otherwise, keep the sad secret bid, - cling to them still! The growing grain has husks; the water has its foam: flowers too have scentless outer sheath of leaves. 

222. வெறுப்பன செய்யினும் பொறுப்பர் பெரியோர். 
செறுத்தோ றுடைப்பினுஞ் செம்புனலோ டூடார் 
மறுத்துஞ் சிறைசெய்வர் நீர்நசைஇ வாழ்நர் 
வெறுப்ப வெறுப்பச் செயினும் பொறுப்பரே 
தாம்வேண்டிக் கொண்டார் தொடர்பு. 
Bear with your friends' faults, as the cultivator bears with the stream that often bursts its enclosure. 
If though they dam it up, the fresh flood should burst its bonds, men do not feel aggrieved; but straightway imprison it again, for by the precious stream they live: so though their friends again and again do very disagreeable things, men bear with those whose friendship is dear. 

223. ஒருவர் பொறுமையே இருவர் நட்பு ஆகும். 
இறப்பவே தீய செயினுந்தம் நட்டார் 
பொறுத்தல் தகுவதொன் றன்றோ — நிறக்கோங்கு 
உருவவண் டார்க்கும் உயர்வரை நாட! 
ஒருவர் பொறையிருவர் நட்பு.
Bear all things! 
Lord of the lofty hilly land, where the bees hum through all the flowery Gongu-glade ! — Though friends should work us surpassing ills, the only thing that is meet is forbearance: patience of one is friendship of the twain. 

224. நட்பினர் பிரிவே உட்சுடும் தீயாம். 
மடிதிரை தந்திட்ட வான்கதிர் முத்தம் 
கடுவிசை நாவாய் கரையலைக்குஞ் சேர்ப்ப! 
விடுதற் கரியார் இயல்பிலரேல் நெஞ்சம் 
சுடுதற்கு மூட்டிய தீ. 
To be wroth with those we love, is like fire in the breast! 
Lord of the shore where pearls of purest lustre are thrown up by circling waves, and where swift darting boats are borne through the surf !—when friends who we may not leave have alien hearts, it is as a scorching fire enkindled in the soul. 

225. நன்மை நட்பினரைப் பொன்னெனப் போற்றுக. 
இன்னா செயினும் விடற்பால ரல்லாரைப் 
பொன்னாகப் போற்றிக் கொளல்வேண்டும் — பொன்னொடு 
நல்லிற் சிதைத்ததீ நாடொறும் நாடித்தம் 
இல்லத்தில் ஆக்குத லால். 
Forsake not friends though they wrong you. 
Though those, from whom you may not part, do grievous things, O maid who art as Lakshmi! you must still cherish your chosen friends—fire destroys men's wealth and happy homes, yet is it sought there and kindled every day. 

226. துன்பஞ் செய்யினும் நண்பரைத் தழுவுக. 
இன்னா செயினும் விடுதற் கரியாரைத் 
துன்னாத் துறத்தல் தகுவதோ — துன்னருஞ்சீர் 
விண்குத்து நீள்வரை வெற்ப! களைபவோ 
கண்குத்திற் றென்றுதங் கை. 
Friends are not to be forsaken on account of their faults.
When those from whom it is hard to part do evil things should men at once renounce them?—Lord of the lengthening hills that pierce the sky, whence rarest giftsdescend !—Do men cut off their hand because it pricked their eye?

227. நட்டபின் தீமை நாடுதல் நன்றல. 
இலங்குநீர்த் தண்சேர்ப்ப! இன்னா செயினும் 
கலந்து பழிகாணார் சான்றோர் — கலந்தபின் 
தீமை யெடுத்துரைக்குந் திண்ணறிவில்லாதார் 
தாமும் அவரிற் கடை. 
Those who forsake friends that have committed a fault are worse than they. 
Lord of the cool shore of the shining sea! The perfect ones when they have contracted an intimacy with any, see no faults in them, even if they do things that cause pain. Those who, being without stable wisdom, take up and tell out men's evil deeds after contracting an intimacy with them, are themselves worse than they. 

228. நண்பர்கள் செயல்எல்லாம் ஆய்ந்தால் நன்மையாம். 
ஏதிலார் செய்த திறப்பவே தீதெனினும் 
நோதக்க தென்னுண்டாம் நோக்குங்கால் — காதல் 
கழுமியார் செய்த கறங்கருவி நாட! 
விழுமிதாம் நெஞ்சத்துள் நின்று. 
Faults in strangers and in friends 
Lord of the land of resounding waterfalls ! Though what those alien to us have done may be surpassingly evil, what is there to be pained at, when you regard it?  
Things done by affectionate friends, will be excellent when so regarded by the mind. 

229. வேற்றுமை நண்பையும் தூற்றாது அடக்குக. 
தமரென்று தாங்கொள்ளப் பட்டவர் தம்மைத் 
தமரன்மை தாமறிந்தா ராயின் அவரைத் 
தமரினும் நன்கு மதித்துத் தமரன்மை 
தம்முள் அடக்கிக் கொளல். 
If friends prove unfaithful, love them the more, and keep the secret of their unfaithfulness in your own bosom. 
If we perceive those we have accepted as our own to be not really ours, we must pay even more respect to them than to our own, and keep concealed in our own mind the fact that they are not really ours. 

230. நட்பிடைக் குற்றம் நாடுதல் தீது. 
குற்றமும் ஏனைக் குணமும் ஒருவனை 
நட்டபின் நாடித் திரிவேனேல் — நட்டான் 
மறைகாவா விட்டவன் செல்வுழிச் செல்க 
அறைகடல்சூழ் வையம் நக. 
He who pries into his friends faults shares the punishment of the revealer of secrets. If, after I have taken a man for my friend, I go about prying into his faults and virtues (other qualities), may I departwhither that man goes who has not kept his friend's secret, while the earth, begirt by the resounding sea, laughs. 
--------------

24. கூடா நட்பு / Ch. 24. Unreal Friendship

231. கருமம் முற்றுந்துணை கயவர்நட்பு நிற்கும். 
செறிப்பில் பழங்கூரை சேறணை யாக 
இறைத்துநீர் ஏற்றுங் கிடப்பர் —கறைக்குன்றம் 
பொங்கருவி தாழும் புனல்வரை நன்னாட! 
தங்கரும் முற்றுந் துணை. 
Unreal friends cling to you till they have gained their desire. 
Lord of the pleasant well-watered mountain land, where boiling waterfalls pour down from the dark hills! (Poor men) linger beneath the old roof that affords no shelter, baling out the water, and making mud embankments, and enduring the down-pour; (even so unreal friends stick by you) till their purpose has been attained. 

232. மாரி பெய்யாமைஆம் சீரிலார் நட்பு. 
சீரியார் கேண்மை சிறந்த சிறப்பிற்றாய் 
மாரிபோல் மாண்ட பயத்ததாம் — மாரி 
வறந்தக்கால் போலுமே வாலருவி நாட! 
சிறந்தக்காற் சீரிலார் நட்பு. 
The friendship of the excellent like rain ; of others like drought. 
Lord of the land of pure (white, forming) waterfalls! The friendship of the virtuous is of exceeding excellence, and yields glorious results — like (seasonable) rain; but the friendship of the vicious, even in the time of its exuberance, is as when the rain fails in the time of drought. 

233. உணர்விலா நட்பு நிரயத்தை ஒத்ததே. 
நுண்ணுணர்வி னாரொடு கூடி நுகர்வுடைமை 
விண்ணுலகே யொக்கும் விழைவிற்றாம் — நுண்ணூல் 
உணர்வில ராகிய ஊதிய மில்லார்ப் 
புணர்தல் நிரயத்துள் ஒன்று. 
Bliss enjoyed with the wise is heaven; association with the ignorant and worthless is hell. 
Enjoyment of the society of men of refinement resembles the heavenly world in the pleasure it affords. Closest contact with those destitute of fine perception of the value of learned pursuits —men who gain no wisdom from you, nor you from them—is one of the hells.

234. கூடாநட்புப் பெருகிப் பின் குறையும். 
பெருகுவது போலத் தோன்றிவைத் தீப்போல் 
ஒருபொழுதுஞ் செல்லாதே நந்தும் — அருகெல்லாஞ் 
சந்தன நீள்சோலைச் சாரல் மலைநாட! 
பந்தமிலாளர் தொடர்பு. 
Intimacy with those who have no sympathy is like fire in the stubble. 
Lord of the land where wide groves of Sandal cover the hilly slopes! Friendship with those who feel not its real obligation, like fire in the straw (suddenly) appears, seeming as though it would increase, but never advancing dies out. 

235. கூடா நட்புத் துன்பமே கொடுக்கும். 
செய்யாத செய்தும்நாம் என்றாலும் செய்தவனைச் 
செய்யாது தாழ்த்துக்கொண் டோட்டலும் — மெய்யாக 
இன்புறூஉம் பெற்றி இகழ்ந்தார்க்கும் அந்நிலையே 
துன்புறூஉம் பெற்றி தரும். 
Boastings and delays. 
The promising to do what cannot be done, and the putting off and leaving undone through delay things that could be done, will forthwith bring experience of sorrow even to those who have condemned truthfully the pleasant experiences of life (ascetics and saints). 

236. சிறியவரை அறியலாம் செயல்வேறுபாட்டினால். 
ஒருநீர்ப் பிறந்தோருங்கு நீண்டக் கடைத்தும் 
விரிநீர்க் குவளையை ஆம்பலொக் கல்லா ; 
பெருநீரார் கேண்மை கொளினுநீ ரல்லார் 
கருமங்கள் வேறு படும். 
The water-lily does not become a lotus by being in the same tank with it: so evil persons will act in conformity with their natures. 
The Ambal (water-lily) does not equalthe expanding Kuvalai though born and growing together with it in the same pool : though they attain to intimacy with those of generous instincts, the deeds of men in whom these instincts are lacking will be diverse. 

237. ஒற்றுமையில்லார் நட்பு இன்னாது. 
முற்றற் சிறுமந்தி முற்பட்ட தந்தையை 
நெற்றுக்கண் டன்ன விரலால் ஞெமிர்த்திட்டுக் 
குற்றிப் பறிக்கும் மலைநாட! இன்னாதே 
ஒற்றுமை கொள்ளாதார் நட்பு. 
Friendship with the uncongenial is bad. 
Lord of the hilly land where the immature little monkey, with its finger like a bean-pod, will flip its father when it meets him, and poke him and snatch fruit from him! Afflictive indeed is friendship with the uncongenial. 

238. உற்றவிடத் துதவுவதே உயர்ந்த நட்பாகும். 
முட்டுற்ற போழ்தின் முடுகிஎன் ஆருயிரை 
நட்டான் ஒருவன்கை நீட்டேனேல் — நட்டான் 
கடிமனை கட்டழித்தான் செல்வுழிச் செல்க 
நெடுமொழி வையம் நக. 
The curse of him who does not offer his life for his friend. 
If I hasten not to put forth my hand and offer my precious life to my friend when in distress, may I depart whither he goes who has violated the sanctity of his friend's wedded wife, while the far-famed world laughs! 

239. புல்லறிவுடையார் நட்புப் பொருந்தாது. 
ஆன்படு நெய்பெய் கலனுள் அதுகளைந்து 
வேம்படு நெய்பெய் தனைத்தரோ ; —தேம்படு 
நல்வரை நாட! நயமுணர்வார் நண்பொரீஇப் 
புல்லறிவி னாரொடு நட்பு. 
Bitter for sweet. 
Lord of the land of goodly hills where honey flows! To forsake the friendship of those who know the right, and cultivate that of shallow pretenders to knowledge, is like emptying out cow's ghee from a vessel and pouring into it margosa oil.

240. தீயினத்தாரைச் சேர்வது தீமையாம். 
உருவிற் கமைந்தான்கண் ஊராண்மை இன்மை 
பருகற் கமைந்தபால் நீரளா யற்றே; 
தெரிவுடையார் தீயினத்தா ராகுதல் நாகம் 
விரிபெடையோ டாடிவிட் டற்று. 
A specious outward appearance without a liberal spirit 
The absence of generosity in those whose exterior is pleasing, is like the mingling of water with the milk provided for food: when men of understanding take to bad company it is like the disporting of a Cobra with a female viper.
-------------

25. அறிவுடைமை /  Ch. 25. The Possession of Practical Wisdom

241. தளர்ந்தாற் பகைவரைத் தாங்குவர் மேலோர். 
பகைவர் பணிவிடம் நோக்கித் தகவுடையார் 
தாமேயும் நாணித் தலைச்செல்லார் காணாய்; 
இளம்பிறை யாயக்கால் திங்களைச் சேரா(து) 
அணங்கருந் துப்பின் அரா. 
Generosity to fallen foes. 
Worthy men, when they behold where foes are foiled, themselves too feel sore abashed, and do not hasten on to crush them. Behold, the strong invulnerable dragon draws not near the moon (to swallow it) when it is in its tender crescent days! 

242. அடக்கமே மக்கட்கு அணிகலம் ஆவது. 
நளிகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! நல்கூர்ந்த மக்கட் 
கணிகல மாவ தடக்கம் — பணிவில்சீர் 
மாத்திரை யின்றி நடக்குமேல் வாழுமூர் 
கோத்திரங் கூறப் படும். 
Self-restraint, an ornament. 
Lord of the cool shore of the spreading sea ! To men in poverty a modest self-restraint is the chiefest ornament. If a man live in unbending pride, and in a manner unbefitting his position, his fellow-townsmen will revile his race. 

243. மறுமையின்பமும் தரும் நல்லொழுக்கம். 
எந்நிலத்து வித்திடினும் காஞ்சிரங்காழ் தெங்காகா(து) 
எந்நாட் டவரும் சுவர்க்கம் புகுதலால், 
தன்னாற்றான் ஆகும் மறுமை வடதிசையும் 
கொன்னாளர் சாலப் பலர். 
Character, not birthplace. 
Whatever soil you sow it in, the Strychnos nut grows not into a cocoa-palm. Some of the Southern land have entered Paradise! It is man's way of life that decides his future state. Full many from the Northern land are denizens of hell. 

244. இனத்தால் மேலோர் மனம் மாறுபடாது. 
வேம்பின் இலையுட் கனியினும் வாழைதன் 
தீஞ்சுவை யாதுந் திரியாதாம்; ஆங்கே 
இனந்தீ தெனினும் இயல்புடையார் கேண்மை 
மனந்தீதாம் பக்கம் அரிது. 
Good men not affected by corrupt influences. 
Though ripened amid margosa leaves the fruit of the plantain loses no atom of its sweet flavour. Even so the friendship of men of noble mood, although their race be evil, can hardly work ill to the mind. 

245. இயற்கை யறிவுடையவர் என்றும் மாறுபடார். 
கடல்சார்ந்தும் இன்னீர் பிறக்கும், மலைசார்ந்தும் 
உப்பீண் டுவரி பிறத்தலால் ; தத்தம் 
இனத்தனைய ரல்லர் எறிகடல்தண்சேர்ப்ப! 
மனத்தனையர் மக்களென் பார். 
Not environment, but mind makes the man. 
Though close by the sea, sweet waters oft-times spring up there; on the hill-side the waters often gush out all brine! Thus men are not as their race. — Lord of the dashing sea's cool shore! Men are as their minds. 

246. கூடுதல் பிரிதல் சான்றோர் குறித்திடார். 
பராஅரைப் புன்னை படுகடல் தண் சேர்ப்ப! 
ஒராஅலும் ஒட்டலுஞ் செய்பவோ? நல்ல 
மரூஉச்செய் தியார்மாட்டுத் தங்கு மனத்தார் 
விராஅஅயச் செய்யாமை நன்று. 
Against caprice. 
Lord of the cool sea-shore, where flourishes the thick-stemmed laurel ! Men whose minds are good (constant), and who adhere to whomsoever they have formed an intimacy with, will not sometimes avoid men, and at other times be intimate. It is good not to have fits of alternating warmth and indifference. 

247. அறிஞரைச் சார்ந்தால் இன்பம் அணுகும் 
உணர உணரும் உணர்வுடை யாரைப் 
புணரிற் புணருமாம். இன்பம் ;—புணரின் 
தெரியத் தெரியுந் தெரிவிலா தாரைப் 
பிரியப் பிரியுமாம் நோய். 
Good and bad associations. 
Join the men who throughly feel true wisdom's inner sense, and forthwith joy joins you. Join yourself to men devoid of the accurate preception of knowledge, and then parting from them is parting from pain. 

248. தானே தன்னைத் தலைவன் ஆக்கலாம். 
நன்னிலைக்கண் தன்னை நிறுப்பானும், தன்னை 
நிலைகலக்கிக் கீழிடு வானும், —நிலையினும் 
மேன்மேல் உயர்த்து நிறுப்பானும், தன்னைத் 
தலையாகச் செய்வானும் தான். 
Men makes, unmakes, and ennobles himself. 
He that establishes a man in good, and he that disturbs that good position and casts him down, and he that more and more exalts a man and establishes him, and he that makes a man head (among men) is (the MAN) HIMSELF. 

249. காரியம் முடிக்கக் கல்லார் பின்னும் கற்றவர் செல்வார். 
கரும வரிசையாற் கல்லாதார் பின்னும் 
பெருமை யுடையாருஞ் சேறல் — அருமரபின் 
ஓதம் அரற்றும் ஒலிகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! 
பேதைமை யன்ற தறிவு. 
It is prudent sometimes to sacrifice pride. 
Lord of the cool shore of the sounding sea, where from old time the billows roar!— In the course of their affairs when even great men follow after the unlearned, this is not folly but wisdom.

250. கருமம் போகம் தருமம் மூன்றும் தக்கோர் அடைவர். 
கருமமும் உட்படப் போகமும் துவ்வத் 
தருமமும் தக்கார்க்கே செய்யா — ஒருநிலையே 
முட்டின்றி மூன்று முடியுமேல் அஃதென்ப 
பட்டினம் பெற்ற கலம். 
A perfect life-voyage. 
If a man has wrought all fitting works, enjoyed all seemly pleasures, done deeds of charity to worthy men: if he shall have accomplished all these three unchecked, in this one state, of him men will say: ‘that is a ship that has gained the haren' 
-------------

26. அறிவின்மை   / Ch. 26. The Lack of Practical Wisdom
 
251. அறிவே பெருஞ்செல்வம் ; அறிவின்மை வறுமையாம். 
நுண்ணுணர் வின்மை வறுமை, அஃதுடைமை 
பண்ணப் பணைத்த பெருஞ்செல்வம் ;—எண்ணுங்கால் 
பெண்அவாய் ஆண்இழந்த பேடி அணியாளோ, 
கண்அவாத் தக்க கலம். 
Lack of accurate perception is poverty. Mere externals are nothing. 
The want of refined knowledge is poverty, its possession is very great and abundant wealth. When one considers, will not a sexless creature, more woman than man, adorn herself with the jewels that her eye desires ? 

252. செல்வமும் அறிவும் ஓரிடம் சேரா. 
பல்லான்ற கேள்விப் பயனுணர்வார் பாடழிந்து 
அல்லல் உழப்ப தறிதிரேல் — தொல்சிறப்பின் 
நாவின் கிழத்தி உறைதலாற் சேராளே, 
பூவின் கிழத்தி புலந்து. 
Why the goddess Fortuna avoids the learned. 
Men of vast and varied lore are seen in low estate, and suffer want. Would you know the reason? The anciently renowned ‘Lady of the tongue' abides with them). ‘The Lady of the flowers' is jealous, and draws not near ! 

253. இளமையிற் கல்லான் இழிவுபின் எய்துவான். 
கல்லென்று தந்தை கழற அதனையோர் 
சொல்லென்று கொள்ளா திகழ்ந்தவன் , —மெல்ல 
எழுத்தோலை பல்லார்முன் நீட்ட விளியா 
வழுக்கோலைக் கொண்டு விடும். 
Folly of refusing to learn in youth. 
He who, when his father urgently bade him learn, did not take it as a serious matter, but contemned it; when, before many men, some one gently presents a written palm-leaf, will in anger fetch a stick to beat him as guilty of an insult. 

254. கல்லாதவனை நாய் என்றே கருதுவர். 
கல்லாது நீண்ட ஒருவன் உலகத்து 
நல்லறி வாள ரிடைப்புக்கு — மெல்ல 
இருப்பினும் நாய்இருந் தற்றே, இராஅ(து) 
உரைப்பினும் நாய்குரைத் தற்று. 
An ignorant man is a mere cur! 
When a man who has grown up without learning enters the society of the wise, if he sit still, it is as if a dog sat there; and if he rise to speak, it is as though a dog barked. 

255. புல்லர் அவையிற் கல்லார் புகுவர். 
புல்லாப்புன் கோட்டிப் புலவ ரிடைப்புக்குக் 
கல்லாத சொல்லும் கடையெல்லாம் ;—கற்ற 
கடாஅயினும் சான்றவர் சொல்லார் பொருள்மேற் 
படாஅ விடுபாக் கறிந்து. 
Cast not pearls before swine. 
All the baser sort consorting with scholars of a heterodox and low school, will utter illiterate rubbish; but men replete with learning, though urgently asked, utter not the results of their learning, knowing that (the asker) would fail to apply their minds to the import of what was said. 

256. கல்லார் விரிவுரை யெல்லாம் பகர்வர். 
கற்றறிந்த நாவினார் சொல்லார்தம் சோர்வஞ்சி; 
மற்றைய ராவார் பகர்வர் ; பனையின்மேல் 
வற்றிய ஓலை கலகலக்கும்; எஞ்ஞான்றும் 
பச்சோலைக் கில்லை ஒலி. 
Modest silence. 
Men of learned tongues are silent, fearing some slip; others (ignorant men) will speak out; on the Palmyra tree the dried-up leaves make a loud rustling noise ; but evermore the green leaf gives forth no sound ! 

257. அறிவிலார் செவியில் அறவுரை ஏறாது. 
பன்றிக்கூழ்ப் பத்தரில் தேமா வடித்தற்றால் 
நன்றறியா மாந்தர்க் கறத்தா றுரைக்குங்கால் ; 
குன்றின்மேற் கொட்டுந் தறிபோல் தலைதகர்ந்து 
சென்றிசையா வாகும் செவிக்கு. 
Good instruction thrown away on thankless people. 
When you expound the way of virtue to ungrateful people, —which is like mashing up sweet mangoes for a pig in a food — trough , — those virtuous teachings lose all their force —have their point (தலை) broken (தகர்) by the obtuseness of the disciple— and do not enter into, or suit his ear, — like a stake which one would drive in on the side of a hill. 

258. நோலா உடம்பில் அறிவு நுழையாது. 
பாலாற் கழீஇப் பலநாள் உணக்கினும் 
வாலிதாம் பக்கம் இருந்தைக் கிருந்தன்று; 
கோலாற் கடாஅய்க் குறினும் புகலொல்லா 
நோலா உடம்பிற் கறிவு. 
Learning requires discipline. 
Though you wash it with milk for many days and dry it, charcoal on no hypothesis becomes white ! So into the undisciplined body wisdom enters not, though you teach it, driving it in with a stick.

259. இழிசெயல் நடுவர் நல்லறிவு இல்லார். 
பொழிந்தினிது நாறினும் பூமிசைதல் செல்லா 
திழிந்தவை காமுறூஉம் ஈப்போல் — இழிந்தவை 
தாங்கலந்த நெஞ்சினார்க் கென்னாகும்? தக்கார்வாய்த் 
தேன்கலந்த தேற்றச்சொல் தேர்வு. 
The fly desires not the fragrant honey. The base esteem not sweet and powerful words. 
To those whose minds are full of foul things, — like the fly which goes not to feed on the flower that pours forth sweetness and breathes perfume, but fixes its eager desire on ordure,—What clear comprehension can there be of the lucid words full of honied sweetness that issue from the mouths of the worthy? 

260. கீழ்மகன் துண்ணிய கேள்வியை விரும்பான். 
கற்றார் உரைக்குங் கசடறு நுண்கேள்வி 
பற்றாது தன்நெஞ் சுதைத்தலால், —மற்றுமோர் 
தன்போல் ஒருவன் முகநோக்கித் தானுமோர் 
புன்கோட்டி கொள்ளுமாம் கீழ். 
The base man rejects the words of the learned, and seeks the assembly of congenial fools. 
The base man does not apprehend the faultless words of accurate instruction which the learned utter. These pain his mind. He therefore looks in the face of some other one like himself (for encouragement), and convenes a wretched assembly of his own: i.e. He finds one like-minded, and the two set up a sect. 
-------------

27. நன்றியில் செல்வம் / Ch. 27. Wealth that profits not

261 நன்றியில் செல்வரை நாடார் அறிஞர். 
அருகல தாகிப் பலபழுத்தக் கண்ணும் 
பொரிதாள் விளவினை வாவல் குறுகா; 
பெரிதணிய ராயினும் வீடிலார் செல்வம் 
கருதும் கடப்பாட்ட தன்று. 
Useless neighbours : so near and yet so far. 
The bat approaches not the Heronia, with its dry stem, though it be night at hand and bear abundant fruit; so although mean people are very close at hand, their wealth is not a thing that can be counted upon. 

262. செல்வம் இருப்பினும் கீழோரைச் சேரார். 
அள்ளிக்கொள் வன்ன குறுமுகிழ வாயினும் 
கள்ளிமேற் கைந்நீட்டார் சூடும்பூ அன்மையால் 
செல்வம் பெரிதுடையராயினும் கீழ்களை 
நள்ளார் அறிவுடை யார். 
None pluck the Kalli flowers. The wise approach not the base. 
Men reach not out their band to the Kalli (Cactus), though it bears delicate round buds by the handful, because these are not flowers they can weave into a garland to crown themselves withal; so wise people from no friendships with the base however great their wealth may be. 

263. ஈயாச் செல்வரிடம் எவரும் சேரார். 
மல்கு திரைய கடற்கோட் டிருப்பினும் 
வல்லூற் றுவரில் கிணற்றின்கட் சென்றுண்பர் : 
செல்வம் பெரிதுடைய ராயினும், சேட்டுசன்றும் 
நல்குவார் கட்டே நசை. 
Though living on the sea-shore, men go to the fresh spring to drink. 
Though men live on the curved shore of the sea with its multitudinous waves, they go and drink at the well, with its perennial fountain of fresh water from the rock; so even if those (who are neighbours) are very wealthy, the desire (of the poor) is towards the liberal, though these may be far to seek. 

264. அறிவிலார் செல்வராய் யாண்டும் வாழ்கின்றார். 
புணர்கடல்சூழ் வையத்துப் புண்ணியமோ வேறே; 
உணர்வ துடையார் இருப்ப — உணர்விலா 
வட்டும் வழுதுணையும் போல்வாரும் வாழ்வரே, 
பட்டும் துகிலும் உடுத்து. 
The senseless dressed in silks ! Virtue quite another matter. 
In the world surrounded by the (all-)embracing sea, merit is quite an indifferent matter! Understanding ones are (poor); and even those of no understanding—who are like mere palm tree tufts and brinjals—live prosperously, clad in silks and rich garments. 

265. கல்லார் செல்வத்திற்குக் காரணம் வினையே : 
நல்லார் நயவரிருப்ப நயமிலாக் 
கல்லார்க்கொன் றாகிய காரணம்,— தொல்லை 
வினைப்பய னல்லது வேல்நெடுங் கண்ணாய்! 
நினைப்ப வருவதொன் றில். 
Men fortunate who seem not to deserve it. 
While pleasant folk and just abide (in poverty), you ponder why men unjust and ignorant have any joy. It is fruit of 'ancient deeds', thou whose long eyes are darts :—to thoughtful mind no other cause occurs. 

266. பண்பிலார் செல்வம் பயனில்லாதது. 
நாறாத் தகடேபோல் நன்மலர்மேற் பொற்பாவாய்! 
நீறாய் நிலத்து விளியரோ ;—வேறாய 
புன்மக்கள் பக்கம் புகுவாய்நீ பொன்போலும் 
நன்மக்கள் பக்கம் துறந்து. 
Fortune cursed.
O golden dame, that sittest like a scentless leaf on a beauteous flower! Die, and fall in ashes to the ground: thou enterest homes of worthless men of perverse mind, forsaking good men pure as gold.

267. அறிஞர் வறுமையும் அறிவிலார் செல்வமும் அடைவது வியப்பே. 
நயவார்கண் நல்குரவு நாணின்று கொல்லோ ; 
பயவார்கட் செல்வம் பரம்பப் பயின்கொல் ; 
வியவாய்காண் வேற்கண்ணாய் இவ்விரண்டும் ஆங்கே 
நயவாது நிற்கும் நிலை. 
Poverty with the good, and prosperity with the mean. 
Has poverty, that bides with men of righteous souls, no shame? Does wealth to ungenerous men stick like glue?O thou of dart-like eye, with wonder see that thus, no just discernment made, these two abide ! 

268. புல்லியோர் செல்வம் பொருத்தம் இல்லாதது. 
வலவைக ளல்லாதார் காலாறு சென்று 
கலவைகள் உண்டு கழிப்பர் — வலவைகள் 
காலாறும் செல்லார் கருனையால் துய்ப்பவே 
மேலாறு பாய விருந்து. 
The self-dying and the self-indulgent. 
Men who are not void of shame will travel forth on foot, and feed on scraps, —so pass their days ; the shameless ones make no journeys on foot, but feed on dainties at home, perspiring over the feast. 

269. அறிவில்லார் செல்வம் தருபயன் ஒன்றில்லை. 
பொன்னிறச் செந்நெற் பொதியொடு பீள்வாட, 
மின்னொளிர் வானம் கடலுள்ளும் கான்றுகுக்கும்; 
வெண்மை யுடையார் விழுச்செல்வ மெய்தியக்கால் 
வண்மையு மன்ன தகைத்து. 
Misplaced liberality; rain on the sea. 
While the red paddy's golden germ is parched within the ear and dies, the cloud gleaming with lightnings pours forth its treasures on the sea. When silly men gain ample wealth, even so are their liberal gifts bestowed ! 

270. ஈயார் என்னிற் செல்வரும் வறிஞரே. 
ஓதியும் ஓதார் உணர்விலார் ஓதாதும் 
ஓதி யனையார் உணர்வுடையார் : — தூய்தாக 
நல்கூர்ந்தும் செல்வர் இரவா தார்,செல்வரும் 
நல்கூர்ந்தார் ஈயா ரெனின். 
The unintelligent never learn; the intelligent perceive without learning. 
Men void of understanding, though they learn, learn not! Men of understanding, though unlearned, are as men learned! They are rich, though utter paupers, who never beg; the rich are paupers if they bestow nothing !
-------------

28. ஈயாமை  /Ch. 28. Absence of Charity; or, the Miser
 
271. பகுத்துண்ணாதவர் புகார் மேலுலகம். 
நட்டார்க்கும் நள்ளா தவர்க்கும் உளவரையால் 
அட்டது பாத்துண்டல் அட்டுண்டல்;—அட்ட 
தடைத்திருந் துண்டொழுகும் ஆவதில் மாக்கட்கு 
அடைக்குமாம் ஆண்டைக் கதவு. 
Share your food with friends and foes. To the selfish heaven's gate is closed. 
To eat your own meal, after sharing what you have cooked, to the extent of your ability, both with those who are friends and those who are not friends, is 'cooking and eating' (= is real house keeping). To the good-for-nothing human beings whose habit of life it is to shut themselves up and eat alone what they have cooked, the door of yonder world will be shut. 

272. இயன்ற அறஞ்செய்தால் பிறவிப்பயன் எய்தலாம். 
எத்துணை யானும் இயைந்த அளவினால் 
சிற்றறஞ் செய்தார் தலைப்படுவர்; —மற்றைப் 
பெருஞ்செல்வம் எய்தியக்கால் பின்அறிதும் என்பார் 
அழிந்தார் பழிகடலத் துள். 
Give what you can, when you can. 
Whatever the measure be, those who do even lesser acts of charity to the measure of their power shall attain to excellence. But those who, when they have obtained great wealth. say 'we will be wise (and give) by and by,' are lost in a sea of guilt. 

273. ஈயாத ஒருவனை எல்லாரும் இகழ்வர். 
துயத்துக் கழியான் துறவோர்க்கொன் றீகலான் 
வைத்துக் கழியும் மடவோனை — வைத்த 
பொருளும் அவனை நகுமே ; உலகத் 
தருளும் அவனை நகும். 
The miser contemptible. 
The senseless man who spends not time in enjoyment (of his wealth), and who gives nothing to pions devotees, but hoards and dies, —him his hoarded wealth derides; him all that is gracious in the world derides. 

274. ஈயார் செல்வம் பின் ஏதிலார் அடைவர். 
கொடுத்தலும் துய்த்தலும் தேற்றா இடுக்குடை 
உள்ளத்தான் பெற்ற பெருஞ்செல்வம் இல்லத் 
துருவுடைக் கன்னியரைப் போலப் பருவத்தால் 
ஏதிலான் துய்க்கப் படும். 
The miser loses what he hoards. 
The great wealth obtained by the man of straitened soul, who knows not how either to give or to enjoy, shall be enjoyed by a stranger, in due season—like lovely virgins remaining unmarried in the dwelling.

275. பிறர்க்யோதவர் பெருஞ்செல்வத்தினும் சான்றோர் வறுமை தனிச்சிறப்புடையது. 
எறிநீர்ப் பெருங்கடல் எய்தி யிருந்தும் 
அறுநீர்ச் சிறுகிணற் றூறல்பார்த் துண்பர்; 
மறுமை யறியாதா ராக்கத்தின் சான்றோர் 
கழிநல் குரவே தலை. 
Poverty better than the wealth of those who live for this world alone. 
Though they have got the mighty sea with its dashing waves (to drink from), men wait for the stream slowly issuing from the little well, often dry, and drink there; so the exceeding poverty of the virtuous is preferable to the wealth of those who know not of the world to come. 

276. யாதவன் பொருள் யார்க்கும் உரியதாம். 
எனதென தென்றிருக்கும் ஏழை பொருளை 
எனதென தென்றிருப்பன் யானும்;—தனதாயின் 
தானும் அதனை வழங்கான் பயன்துவ்வான் ; 
யானும் அதனை அது. 
Whose is the miser's wealth? 
As to the property which the wretched churl claims saying 'It is mine, it is mine ,' I too chime in with "It is mine, it is mine;' for if it is his, he himself spends it not, nor enjoys the benefit of it; and I, too, neither spend nor enjoy it! 

277. வறுமையுடையவர் செல்வர்போல் வருந்தார். 
வழங்காத செல்வரின் நல்கூர்ந்தார் உய்ந்தார் ;
இழந்தார் எனப்படுதல் உய்ந்தார் — உழந்ததனைக் 
காப்புரிந்தார் கல்லுதலும் உய்ந்தார்தம் கைந்நோவு 
யாப்புய்ந்தார் உய்ந்த பல . 
Poor men better off than churls. 
The poor have escaped much from which rich men that dispense not suffer. They have escaped the reputation of having lost (their substance). They have escaped the toil of saving it. They have escaped (the labour of) digging (to hide it). They have escaped the ache of hands securing it from powerful plunderers. Many are the (sorrows) they have escaped.

278. உரிய பொருளை உடன்பகுத்து உண்ணுக. 
தனதாகத் தான்கொடான்; தாயத் தவரும் 
தமதாய போழ்தே கொடாஅர் : — தனதாக 
முன்னே கொடுப்பின் அவர்கடியார், தான்கடியான் 
பின்னை அவர்கொடுக்கும் போழ்து. 
Nothing but his own churlishness hinders the churl from being liberal. 
While it was his he gave not; and his heirs, how it is theirs, give not. Before, while it was his, if he had given, they would not have reproved (him); and afterwards, if they had given, he would not have reproved them! Men's own avarice is the sole reason for the lack of charity.

279.வருத்தினாற் கொடுப்பர் தம்பொருளைக் கீழ்மக்கன். 
இரவலர் கன்றாக ஈவார்ஆவாக 
விரகின் சுரப்பதாம் வண்மை ; —விரகின்றி 
வல்லவர் வான்ற வடியாபோல் வாய்வைத்துக் 
கொல்லச் சுரப்பதாம் கீழ். 
Those wanting in liberal instinct give only on compulsion. 
Liberality is that which yields its gifts spontaneously (from good instinct), the askers being as the calf and the givers as the cow; meanness yields only when put into a strait and forced, as a cow with no good instinct gives a scanty supply (வடி) when strong ones press. 

280. ஈட்டும் பொருளால் எய்தும் பல துயர். 
ஈட்டலும் துன்பமற் றீட்டிய ஒண்பொருளைக் 
காத்தலும் ஆங்கே கடுந்துன்பம் ;—காத்தல் 
குறைபடின் துன்பம் கெடின்துன்பம் துன்பக் 
குறைபதி மற்றைப் பொருள். 
Wealth is the source of many sorrows. 
Gathering it together is trouble, and even so the guarding of resplendent wealth is severe trouble. If the guarded heap diminish, it is trouble. If it perish, it is trouble. Wealth is trouble's very dwelling-place!
---------------

29. இன்மை /  Ch. 29. Poverty
 
281. பொருளில்லாரைப் பிணம்போலவே மதிப்பார். 
அத்திட்ட கூறை அரைச்சுற்றி வாழினும் 
பத்தெட் டுடைமை பலருள்ளும் பாடெய்தும்; 
ஒத்த குடிப்பிறந்தக் கண்ணுமொன் றில்லாதார் 
செத்த பிணத்திற் கடை. 
Money commands respect. 
Though he wraps a cloth dyed red around his loins, a dozen coins or so, will gain (the wretch) respect among many men! The man devoid of wealth, though born of noble race, is viler (in the world's estimation) than a lifeless corpse !

282. இரப்பவன் எல்லா இடமும் புகுவான். 
நீரினும் நுண்ணிது நெய்என்பர், நெய்யினும் 
யாரும் அறிவர் புகை நுட்பம் ; —தேரின, 
நிரப்பிடும்பை யாளன் புகுமே, புகையும் 
புகற்கரிய பூழை நுழைந்து. 
The insinuating mendicant. 
Where water cannot enter! the more insinuating ghi glides in; and smoke as a subtler power to penetrate than even ghi. If you look into it, the man debased by poverty will enter haunts where smoke scarce finds a way. 

283. வறுமை யுடையவர்பால் உறவினர் வாரார். 
கல்லோங் குயர்வரைமேற் காந்தள் மலராக்கால் 
செல்லாவாம் செம்பொறி வண்டினம் ;—கொல்லைக் 
கலாஅல் கிளிகடியும் கானக நாட! 
இலாஅஅர்க் கில்லை தமர். 
All abandon the needy. 
When on the high hill's crags the Kanthal blooms no more, the crimson-spotted beetle tribe seek not its boughs;—Lord of the hills wherefrom they scare parrots with stones! — the needy have no kin. 

284. செல்வர் இடத்தில் எல்லாரும் சேர்வார். 
உண்டாய போழ்தின் உடைந்துழிக் காகம்போல் 
தொண்டா யிரவர் தொகுப்வே ; —வண்டாய்த் 
திரிதருங் காலத்துத் தீதிலிரோ என்பார் 
ஒருவரும் இவ்வுலகத் தில். 
Time-serving friends. 
When wealth is there, obsequious myriads will assemble, like crows around the fallen corpse. When wealth, as the beetle wheels its flight, is gone, no one in all the world will ask, ‘Is it well with you?' 

285. ஆண்மை குலம் கல்வி அழியும் வறுமையால். 
பிறந்த குலம்மாயும்; பேராண்மை மாயும்; 
சிறந்ததங் கல்வியும் மாயும்; —கறங்கருவி 
கல்மேற் கரூஉம் கணமலை நன்னாட! 
இன்மை தழுவப்பட்டார்க்கு. 
Nothing benefits the poor man. 
Lord of the pleasant land of clustering hills whose crags are washed by sounding waterfalls !—Their race is nought, their manly prowess is nought, their rare learning is nought, when men are held in poverty's embrace. 

286. வறியவன் வாழ்வினாற் பிறர்பயன் அடையார். 
உள்கூர் பசியால் உழைநசைஇச் சென்றார்கட் 
குள்ளூ ரிருந்துமொன் றாற்றாதான், —உள்ளூர் 
இருந்துயிர் கொன்னே கழியாது தான்போய் 
விருந்தினனாதலே நன்று. 
Let the churl become a guest of others! 
Although he dwells within the village, and sees the poor draw nigh with hungry soul desiring aid, he yields them none : why then in the village does he vainly pass his days? It were better he went to be a guest himself ! 

287. வறுமை வந்தால் அறிவும் நீங்கும். 
நீர்மையே யன்றி நிரம்ப எழுந்ததங் 
கூர்மையு மெல்லாம் ஒருங்கிழப்பர் ;—கூர்மையின் 
முல்லை அலைக்கும் எயிற்றாய் ; நிரப்பென்னும் 
அல்லல் அடையப்பட்டார். 
Poverty ruins all. 
O thou whose teeth vie in sharpness with jasmine buds! — When sharp distress of poverty assails, men lose all their attributes of goodness at once, with the mind's acuteness gained from amplest stores of wisdom. 

288. பிறர்க்கு உதவாதவன் இரப்பதே நன்று. 
இட்டாற்றுப் பட்டொன் றிரந்தவர்க் காற்றாது 
முட்டாற்றுப் பட்டும் முயன்றுள்ளூர் வாழ்தலின் 
நெட்டாற்றுச் சென்று நிரைமனையிற் கைந்நீட்டுங் 
கொட்டாற்று வாழ்க்கையே நன்று. 
The struggle with want. 
Better indeed is the life that pertains to the ruinous course (கெட்ட ஆறு), that going far away (நெட்டாறு), stretches out (supplicating) hand at every door, than to dwell at home (உள்ளூர் ) toiling, subjectto (ஆற்றுப்பட்டு ) obstacles (முத்து ). not giving aught to those that ask, because of straitened circumstances.

289. உப்பிலாக் கீரையும் உண்பார் வறியவர். 
கடகம் செறிந்ததங்கைகளால் வாங்கி 
அடகு பறித்துக்கொண் டட்டுக் —குடைகலனா 
உப்பிலி வெந்தைதின்றுள்ளற்று வாழ்பவே, 
துப்புரவு சென்றுலந்தக் கால். 
Reverses. 
The hands once loaded with golden bracelets now cull the forest-herb and cook the meal; and then eat the mess unseasoned, from the palm-leaf for a dish! Thus sad at heart they live, when fortune is gone and ruin come. 

290. செல்வவாழ்வு இல்லையேற் சுற்றமும் இல்லை. 
ஆர்த்த பொறிய அணிகிளர் வண்டினம் 
பூத்தொழி கொம்பின்மேற் செல்லாவாம்; —நீர்த்தருவி 
தாழா உயர்சிறப்பின் தண்குன்ற நன்னாட! 
வாழாதார்க் கில்லை தமர். 
Interested friends. 
The humming spotted beetle tribes all bright in hue gather not on the branch that has ceased to blow. Lord of the good cool hilly land, of high renown, whence bounteous streams flow down unceasingly—the unprosperous have no kin!
--------------

30. மானம் Ch. 30. Honour (Self-respect.)
 
291. மானம் உடையான் மனம் கனல்போன்றது. 
திருமதுகை யாகத் திறனிலார் செய்யும் 
பெருமிதங் கண்டக் கடைத்தும் — எரிமண்டிக் 
கானந் தலைப்பட்ட தீப்போற் கனலுமே, 
மான முடையார் மனம். 
Honourable minds are wroth with wealthy arrogance. 
The mind of those possessed of honourable feeling will kindle into flame, like the fire that has caught the forest when the conflagration rages, whenever they behold the haughty acts of those who are destitute of virtuous habits, and to whom their wealth is their only strength. 

292. உரையான் தன்குறை மானம் உடையவன். 
என்பாய் உகினும் இயல்பிலார் பின் சென்று 
தம்பா டுரைப்பரோ தம்முடையார்; —தம்பா(டு) 
உரையாமை முன்னுணரும் ஒண்மை யுடையார்க்(கு) 
உரையாரோ தாமுற்றநோய். 
High-minded men complain not to the unsympathizing. 
Will (honourable men who are) 'masters of themselves' follow graceless men to tell of their sufferings, tbough fallen away to mere skeletons ? Do they not (rather) tell the pain they have felt to those enlightened souls that understand their sufferings before they speak ? 

293. மானம் உள்ளவன் செல்வரை மதியான். 
யாமாயின் எம்இல்லம் காட்டுதும் தாமாயின் 
காணவே கற்பழியும் என்பார்போல் — நாணிப் 
புறங்கடை வைத்தீவர் சோறும் அதனால் 
மறந்திடுக செல்வர் தொடர்பு. 
Dependence on the wealthy destroys self-respect. 
As for ourselves we would introduce them (these friends) to our household : but as regards them, they are ashamed (of us), as though they said, as soon as they (the ladies) saw them (the friends,) it would be the destruction of their womanly reserve; and so they seat us at the backdoor and give us rice! Therefore let us dismiss all thought of rich men's friendship. 

294. இம்மையும் மறுமையும் இன்பம்தரும் மானம். 
இம்மையும் நன்றாம் இயல்நெறியுங் கைவிடா 
தும்மையும் நல்ல பயத்தலால், —செம்மையின் 
நானம் கமழும் கதுப்பினாய்! நன்றேகாண், 
மான முடையார் மதிப்பு. 
The law of honour is that maintained by honourable men. 
O thou whose locks diffuse the odour of pleasant musk! Behold, especially good is (it to cultivate) that which is esteemed by men of honourable mind; for in this world it is (obviously) good : and, since it leads to perseverance in the way of virtue, it will yield good things in yonder world also. 

295. அறிஞர் பழிபாவங்கட்கு அஞ்சுவார். 
பாவமும் ஏனைப் பழியும் படவருவ 
சாயினும் சான்றாவா செய்கலார் ; சாதல் 
ஒருநாள் ஒருபொழுதைத் துன்பம் அவைபோல் 
அருகவை யாற்றுதல் இன்று. 
Dishonour worse than death. 
The men 'fulfilled of excellence,' though death were the alternative, do not deeds that entail sin and guilt.  Death is an affliction for one day, and for a little while. There is nothing that works irreparable ill like those (deeds). 

296. இரவாதவரே பெருஞ் செல்வர் என்பவர். 
மல்லன்மா ஞாலத்து வாழ்பவருள்ளெல்லாம் 
செல்வ ரெனினும் கொடாதவர் நல்கூர்ந்தார்; 
நல்கூர்ந்தக் கண்ணும் பெருமுத் தரையரே, 
செல்வரைச் சென்றிரவு தார். 
The wealthy and the poor. 
Poor are the men that give not, even though deemed wealthiest of all that flourish on the teeming apple earth! They who even when they are poor seek not as suppliants wealthy men are 'Lords of the three mighty lands.' 

297. தூயமனத்தவர் சொற்பழிக்கு அஞ்சுவர். 
கடையெலாம் காய்பசி அஞ்சுமற் றேனை 
இடையெலாம் இன்னாமை அஞ்சும் — புடைபரந்த 
விற்புருவ வேல்நெடுங் கண்ணாய்! தலையெல்லாம் 
சொற்பழி அஞ்சி விடும். 
The honourable dread most the loss of reputation. 
Thou who hast long dart-like eyes with eye-brows extending far, like a bow! the lowest class of men dread burning hunger; the other (or middle class) dread what is unpleasant; all the chief of men fear words that impute crime. 

298. செல்வர் சிறுநோக்கம் நல்லோரை வருத்தும். 
நல்லா பெரிதளியர் நல்கூர்ந்தார் என்றெள்ளிச் 
செல்வர் சிறுநோக்கு நோக்குங்கால் — கொல்லன் 
உலையூதுந் தீயேபோல் உள்கனலும் கொல்லோ 
தலையாய சான்றோர் மனம். 
The rich man's contemptuous pity. 
When the very worthy and thoroughly learned see the rich men's glance of disparagement, as they say contemptuously, 'These are good people —persons in greatly reduced circumstances—poor folks,' does not their mind kindle into flame within them, like the fire by the breath of the bellows on the blacksmith's forge? 

299. தமது குலமேன்மையும் சாற்றார் மாணிகன். 
நாச்சியார்க் கியாமை நாண்அன்று; நாள்நாளும் 
அச்சத்தால் நாணுதல் நாண்அன்றாம்; —எச்சத்தில் 
மெல்லிய ராகித்தம் மேலாயார் செய்தது 
சொல்லா திருப்பது நாண். 
What is dishonouring. 
It is no shame (disgrace) not to (be able to give to those who desire it of us. The shrinking on account of fear (felt) day by day is not shame (modesty). But to become reduced in other ways, and not to [dare to] tell what injuries those who love us not have inflicted on us is shame (disgrace, or self-respect). 

300. மானங் கெடவரினும் வானுலகும் வேண்டார். 
கடமா தொலைச்சிய கானுறை வேங்கை 
இடம் வீழ்ந்த துண்ணா திறக்கும்;—இடமுடைய 
வானகம் கையுறினும் வேண்டார் விழுமியோர், 
மானம் அழுங்க வரின். 
Heaven itself must not be sought at the expense of honour 
The jungle-haunting tiger that slays the wild cow, refuses to eat and passes by what has fallen (of itself) in its path (i. e. carrion); so the excellent, though the wide realms of heaven were within their reach, would not desire them, if to be obtained (only) by the loss of honour.
--------------

31. இரவச்சம்  /Ch. 31. The Dread of Mendicancy.
 
301. தெளிந்த அறிவினர் மயங்கினோர் பின்செல்வார். 
நம்மாலே யாவர்இந் நல்கூர்ந்தார் எஞ்ஞான்றுந் 
தம்மால்ஆம் ஆக்கம் இலர்என்று — தம்மை 
மருண்ட மனத்தார்பின் செல்பவோ தாமும் 
தெருண்ட அறிவி னவர். 
Ignorant condescending patrons. 
Will men themselves possessed of clear discerning knowledge follow after those who have yielded themselves up to mental bewilderment, and who (erroneously) say (of suppliants), ‘These poor folks depend entirely on us, evermore are they without resources in themselves ?' 

302. இழிசெயல் வாழ்வினும் இறப்பது நன்று. 
இழித்தக்க செய்தொருவன் ஆர உணலின் 
பழித்தக்க செய்யான் பசித்தல் தவறோ 
விழித்திமைக்கு மாத்திரை யன்றோ? ஒருவன் 
அழித்துப் பிறக்கும் பிறப்பு. 
Honest hunger and dishonest fulness of food. 
Is not a man's dying and birth again measured by the twinkling of an eye? Is it then a fault if a man rather choose to suffer hunger, doing no blameworthy actions, than to feed full, doing things that entail disgrace ? 

303. அன்பின் இடத்தே மேன்மக்கள் அணுகுவர். 
இல்லாமை கந்தா இரவு துணிந்தொருவர் 
செல்லாரு மல்லர் சிறுநெறி ;—புல்லா 
அகம்புகுமின் உண்ணுமின் என்பவர்மாட் டல்லால் 
முகம்புகுதல் ஆற்றுமோ மேல்? 
Ask only of the courteous. 
There will never be wanting those who, with their destitution as their support (making it their excuse), will venture upon mendicancy, and tread the way of humiliation; but will the noble-minded man enter (as a suppliant) the presence of any save of those who will embrace him and say, 'Enter my dwelling, eat of my food ?' 

304. செல்வர்பின் சென்று நில்லார் நல்லோர். 
திருத்தன்னை நீப்பினும் தெய்வம் செறினும் 
உருத்த மனத்தோ டுயர்வுள்ளி னல்லால், 
அருத்தம் செறிக்கும் அறிவிலார் பின்சென் 
றெருத்திறைஞ்சி நில்லாதாம் மேல். 
No reverses bend the noble spirit. 
Though fortune forsake him, and fate frown, the man of lofty soul, dwelling with steadfast mind on things above, disdains to stand with bending neck in the train of the foolish who hoard their wealth. 

305. கரவா நண்பரையும் இரவார் மேலோர். 
கரவாத திண்ணன்பின் கண்ணன்னார் கண்ணும். 
இரவாது வாழ்வதாம் வாழ்க்கை ;—இரவினை 
உள்ளுங்கால் உள்ளம் உருகுமால், என்கொலோ 
கொள்ளுங்கால் கொள்வார் குறிப்பு. 
Mendicancy is always painful. 
To live asking naught even from those dear as an eye, whose love is sure, and who never refuse, is happy life. Since the mind dissolves in shame at the very thought of beggary,— when men receive alms, what are the receivers' thoughts, I pray ? 

306. அயலாரை இரப்பதால் பயன் யாதும் மில்லை. 
இன்னா இயைக இனிய ஒழிகென்று 
தன்னையே தான்இரப்பத் தீர்வதற்கு — என்னைகொல் 
சாதல் கவற்றும் மனத்தினால் கண்பாழ்பட் 
டேதி லவரை இரவு. 
Contentment better than mendicancy. 
When a man himself, begs of himself, saying, ‘Let troubles come, let joys depart!' the sting of poverty is extracted; why then, for this purpose, should any one, his mind agitated with desire, and his eye wasted with weeping, beg of strangers ? 

307. இரப்பாரை இகழாது இருப்பவன் சிறந்தோன். 
என்றும் புதியார் பிறப்பினும் இவ்வுலகத் 
தென்றும் அவனே பிறக்கலான் — குன்றின் 
பரப்பெலாம் பொன்னொழுகும் பாய்அருவி நாட! 
இரப்பாரை எள்ளா மகன். 
Beggars are universally despised. 
Lord of the land where gold is borne down by rushing waterfalls from every hilly slope! — Though in this world new (kinds of) men are continually born, that very man is never born that does not scorn mendicants. 

308. ஈஎன விரப்பது மிகவும் இழிவாம். 
புறத்துத்தான் இன்மை நலிய அகத்துத்தன் 
நன்ஞானம் நீக்கி நிறீஇ ஒருவனை 
ஈயாய் எனக்கென் றிரப்பானேல் அந்நிலையே 
மாயானோ மாற்றி விடின். 
Mendicancy is unmitigated misery. 
Want wastes his outward frame; he lays aside wisdom, his inward being's good; and so resolving, begs of some stranger, saying, 'Give to me.’— If then the boon be refused, must he not that very instant die? 

309. வறிஞர் செல்வரைச் சார்ந்து வாழ்க. 
ஒருவ ரொருவரைச் சார்ந்தொழுகல் ஆற்றி 
வழிபடுதல் வல்லுத லல்லால், —பரிசழிந்து 
செய்யீரோ என்னானும் என்னுஞ்சொற் கின்னாதே 
பையத்தான் செல்லும் நெறி? 
A hermitage preferable to mendicancy. 
Men form close intimacies with others and live as their dependants, and this is permissible ; but is it more painful quietly to go one's way (to the hermitage) than, lost to all sense of personal dignity, to say, 'Will ye not do aught for me?’

310. பழமைபற்றிக் கிழமை பாராட்டுக. 
பழமைகந் தாகப் பசைந்த வழியே 
கிழமைதான் யாதானுஞ் செய்க ;—கிழமை 
பொறாஅர் அவரென்னின பொத்தித்தம் நெஞ்சத்து 
தறாஅச் சுடுவதோர் தீ. 
Relieve the wants of old friendsthough they shrink from it. 
Relying on old friendship, in an affectionate manner, render such assistance as your intimacy Warrants. If he will not endure (the assistance), will it not be a fire heaped up and burning in his bosom?
----------------

32. அவையறிதல் / Ch. 32. The Knowledge of the Assembly

311. சிற்றறிவினர் அவை சேரார் அறிஞர். 
மெய்ஞ்ஞானக் கோட்டி உறழ்வழி விட்டாங்கோர் 
அஞ்ஞானந் தந்திட் டதுவாங் கறத்துழாய்க் 
கைஞ்ஞானங் கொண்டொழுகுங் காரறி வாளர்முன் 
சொன்ஞானம் சோர விடல். 
Cast not pearls before swine. 
Decline entirely to utter words of wisdom before heretics (காரறிவாளர் = men of darkened knowledge — men who professing to be wise, have their understanding darkened), who having forsaken the way pertaining to the assemblies of true wisdom, have there laid down propositions of unwisdom, and propagating them diligently, live in accordance with their own shallow wisdom! 

312. போலிப் புலவர்பாற் யோகார் புலவர்.
நாப்பாடம் சொல்லி நயமுணர்வார் போற்செறிக்கும் 
தீப்புலவற் சேரார் செறிவுடையார் ;— தீப்புலவன் 
கோட்டியுட் குன்றக் குடிப்பழிக்கும் அல்லாக்கால் 
தோட்டைக் கொள்ளா எழும். 
Avoid the angry violent disputant. 
Well-disciplined men come not near the heretic (=man of evil learning, the teacher of an evil system), who stores up (in his memory certain formulas, comp. 304), as though he understood their worth, and repeats them by rote (lit. as a tongue-lesson). The heretic, if worsted in the assembly, will abuse the family (of his opponents); or he will spring up and challenge them to fight. 

313. கற்றது அறியாமற் கழறுவர் பேதையர். 
சொற்றாற்றுக் கொண்டு சுனைத்தெழுதல் காமுறுவர் 
கற்றாற்றல் வன்மையுந் தாந்தேறார் , —கற்ற 
செலவுரைக்கும் ஆற்றியார், தோற்ப தறியார், 
பலவுரைக்கும் மாந்தர் பலர். 
Vain babblers. 
Many are the men that utter many things,—who long to raise up (in debate), from mere love of talking and an itching tongue; who do not themselves apprehend the power and might of learning; who know not the way to utter with penetrating force whatthey have learnt; and who know not what defeat means.

314. பேதை புல்லறிவைப் பேசி வெளிப்படுத்தும். 
கற்றதூஉ மின்றிக் கணக்காயர் பாடத்தால் 
பெற்றதாம் பேதையோர் சூத்திரம் — மற்றதனை 
நல்லா ரிடைப்புக்கு நாணாது சொல்லித்தான் 
புல்லறிவு காட்டி விடும். 
The neophyte. 
Without any learning of his own, the fool has obtained one formula from overhearing the lessons of a tutor (who was teaching others ), yet unabashed he enters the circle of the good, speaks it out, and makes exhibition of his mean understanding.

315. சொற்போர் புரிவதை நற்புலவர் விழையார். 
வென்றிப் பொருட்டால் விலங்கொத்து மெய்கொள்ளார் 
கன்றிக் கறுத்தெழுந்து காய்வாரோ —டொன்றி 
உரைவித் தகமெழுவார் காண்பவே, கையுள் 
சுரைவித்துப் போலுந்தம் பல். 
Convincing arguments. 
They who arise to utter words of wisdom, having associated themselves with the assembly of those who rage and burn and fume with anger, like beasts, for the mere sake of victory, not understanding the truth, shall see their own teeth like pumpkin seeds in their hands! 

316. மூடர் மொழியையும் சான்றோர் கேட்பர். 
பாடமே ஓதிப் பயன்தெரிதல் தேற்றாத 
மூடர் முனிதக்க சொல்லுங்கால் — கேடருஞ்சீர்ச் 
சான்றோர் சமழ்த்தனர் நிற்பவே மற்றவரை 
ஈன்றாட் சிறப்பப் பரிந்து. 
Fools disgrace themselves in the assembly of the learned. 
When foolish men chant their lesson, not knowing the fruit that lesson yields, but uttering words that gender wrath, the learned ones, whose fame dies not, will stand by ashamed, sorely pitying the mother that bare them. 

317. நூற்பொருள் காண்பது யார்க்கும் அருமையாம். 
பெறுவது கொள்பவர் தோள்போல் நெறிப்பட்டுக் 
கற்பவர்க் கெல்லாம் எளியநூல்— மற்றம் 
முறிபுரை மேனியருள்ளம்போன் றியார்க்கும் 
அறிதற் கரிய பொருள். 
The letter easy, the meaning hard. 
Like the charms of those who sell their love for what they gain, the sacred texts are easy to those who rightly learn then; but like the minds of these whose forms are soft as tender shoots, the meaning is hard to all. 

318. புத்தகம் தொகுத்தோர் எல்லாரும் புலவர் அல்லர். 
புத்தகமே சாலத் தொகுத்தும் பொருள்தெரியார் 
உய்த்தக மெல்லாம் நிறைப்பினும் — மற்றவற்றைப் 
போற்றும் புலவரும் வேறே பொருள்தெரிந்து 
தேற்றும் புலவரும் வேறு. 
Book collectors and scholars. 
Although men gather together books in abundance, and, not understanding their contents, fill the whole house with them; the sages who merely take care of books are of one sort, and the sages who understand their contents, and make them clear to others, are of another sort.

319. பொருள் விளக்குவதே நூலிற்கு உரையாம். 
பொழிப்பகலம் நுட்பநூல் எச்சமிந் நான்கிற் 
கொழித்தகலங் காட்டாதார் சொற்கள் — பழிப்பில் 
நிரையாமா சேர்க்கும் நெடுங்குன்ற நாட! 
உரையாமோ நூலிற்கு நன்கு. 
A perfect commentary. 
Lord of the land of long chains of hills where the wild cattle assemble in herds! 
Is that a good commentary to a faultless composition, which consists of the words of those who do not sift it thoroughly, in the four divisions of summary, amplification, minute exposition, and supplementary information, and thus exhibit the full import? 

320. நற்குடிப்பிறப்பிலார் நல்லறிவு அடையார். 
இற்பிறப் பில்லார் எனைத்துநூல் கற்பினும் 
சொற்பிறரைக் காக்குங் கருவியரோ — இற்பிறந்த 
நல்லறிவாளர் நவின்றநூல் தேற்றாதார் 
புல்லறிவு தாமறிவ தில். 
Critics. 
Will those who are not of high family, however they may study learned works, be fit instruments to guard others from faults of speech? And men of good family who are well learned will not (seem to) be aware of the deficiencies of those who do not comprehend the works they talk of.
-------------

33 . புல்லறிவாண்மை / Ch. 33. Insufficient Knowledge
 
321. புல்லறிவுடையார் புலவர் உரை கொள்ளார். 
அருளின் அறமுரைக்கும் அன்புடையார் வாய்ச்சொல் 
பொருளாகக் கொள்வர் புலவர் — பொருளல்ல 
ஏழை அதனை இகழ்ந்துரைக்கும் பாற்கூழை 
மூழை சுவையுணரா தாங்கு. 
Only the wise value the wise. 
Men of sense receive as a reality the words from the mouth of the loving ones who graciously teach virtue. The (ignorant)wretch, himself unreal, speaks (of virtue) with contempt. Just so the ladle distinguishes not the flavour of the rice boiled in milk. 

322. அறநெறி கீழ்மக்கள் செவியில் ஏறாது. 
அவ்வியம் இல்லார் அறத்தா றுரைக்குங்கால் 
செவ்விய ரல்லார் செவிகொடுத்துங் கேட்கலார் 
கவ்வித்தோல் தின்னும் குணுங்கர்நாய் பாற்சோற்றின் 
செவ்வி கொளல்தேற்றா தாங்கு. 
Foolish people hearing hear not. 
When men of ungrudging soul declare the way of virtue, those who are not rightly disposed, although they give ear, hear not. Even so the currier's dog seizes on and devours leather, not appreciating the flavour of milk and rice. 

323. நன்றியில்லாதார் பொன்றுவது நலமே. 
இமைக்கும் அளவில்தம் இன்னுயிர்போம் மார்க்கம் 
எனைத்தானும் தாம்கண்டிருந்தும் — தினைத்துணையும் 
நன்றி புரிகல்லா நாணில் மடமாக்கள் 
பொன்றிலென் பொன்னாக்கா லென். 
Useless in life and unmourned in death. 
What matters it whether they live or die—the shameless stupid people who do no good, not even as much as a grain of millet, though they see by every species of example the way in which their life so sweet to them, passes away in the twinkling of an eye? 

324. பல்லோர் பகைகொளல் புல்லறிவாகும். 
உளநாள் சிலவால் உயிர்க்கேமம் இன்றால் 
பலர்மன்னுந் தூற்றும் பழியால் — பலருள்ளும் 
கண்டாரோ டெல்லாம் நகாஅ தெவனொருவன் 
தண்டித் தனிப்பகை கோள். 
Misanthropy. 
Since being's days are few, and life no safeguardowns, and guilt by many blamed is rife, mid many men, why, laughing not with all they see, should any sulk apart, and nurse a sullen hate ? 

325. அவையில் எவரையும் வைவது கொடியது. 
எய்தி யிருந்த அவை முன்னர்ச் சென்றெள்ளி 
வைதா னொருவன் ஒருவனை — வையம் 
வயப்பட்டான் வாளா இருப்பானேல் வைதான் 
வியத்தக்கான் வாழு மெனின். 
The evil tongue. 
A man has gone before the assembly that had gathered together, and contemning another has reviled him. Now if the reviled one remain silent, the reviler is to be wondered at if he survive; (for abuse is his very life, and the patience of the reviled one has closed his mouth.) 

326. அறச்செயல் புரியான் சிறப்பினை அடையான். 
மூப்புமேல் வாராமை முன்னே அறவினையை 
ஊக்கி அதன்கண் முயலாதான் — நூக்கிப் 
புறத்திரு போகென்னும் இன்னாச்சொல் இல்லுள் 
தொழுத்தையாற் கூறப் படும். 
Dishonoured old age. 
He who before old age comes, has not undertaken and zealously carried out works of virtue, will be pushed about in the house addressed in harsh language, and bidden to get on one side or to go out, by even the maid-servants. 

327. புல்லறிவு வீணிற் பொழுதுபோக்குவதே. 
தாமேயும் இன்புறார் தக்கார்க்கும் நன்றாற்றார் 
ஏமஞ்சார் நன்னெறியுஞ் சேர்கலார் — தாமயங்கி 
ஆக்கத்துள் தூங்கி அவத்தமே வாழ்நாளைப் 
போக்குவார் புல்லறிவி னார். 
Wasted lives. 
Men of scanty wisdom are those who do not themselves enjoy any sweets of life, bestow no benefactions on worthy persons, draw not nigh the good path that safeguards (the soul), but infatuated and absorbed in the acquisition of wealth, pass away their days of life in vain. 

328. பேதையார் அறச்செயல் பின்செய நினைப்பார். 
சிறுகாலை யேதமக்குச் செல்வுழி வல்சி 
இறுகிறுகத் தோட்கோப்புக் கொள்ளார் — இறுகிறுகிப் 
பின்னறிவாம் என்றிருக்கும் பேதையார் கைகாட்டும் 
பொன்னும் புளிவிளங்கா யாம். 
The miser's death-bed. 
In the very earliest time (in early youth) they take not food for the journey which they must make (into another world), tying tightly the wallet on their shoulders ; but tying tightly (their treasure bags), they say, 'In after days we will learn wisdom;' the gold these idiots will indict with their hands (as legacies, when they are speechless, and in the grasp of death) will be as sour vilam fruit. 

329. சிறந்த வாழ்வில் அறம்புரிவது மேல். 
வெறுமை யிடத்தும் விழுப்பிணிப் போழ்தும் 
மறுமை மனத்தாரே யாகி — மறுமையை 
ஐந்தை யனைத்தானும் ஆற்றிய காலத்துச் 
சிந்தியார் சிற்றறிவி னார். 
Saints when they suffer, sinners when they prosper. 
When poor, or when disease's deadly grasp they feel, to other world alone their minds are given ; but when wealth grows, no thought, small as a grain of mustard seed, give they to other world —these souls unwise!

330. நிலையிலா வாழ்வினை நினைந்து அறம்புரிக. 
என்னேமற் றவ்வுடம்பு பெற்றும் அறம்நினையார் 
கொன்னே கழிப்பர்தம் வாழ்நாளை — அன்னோ 
அளவிறந்த காதல்தம் ஆருயி ரன்னார்க் 
கொளஇழைக்குங் கூற்றமுங் கண்டு. 
Friends hurried away; the unwise heed it not. 
Though they have gained a human frame, of virtue think they not! In vain they spent their days. Alas! and yet they see death eagerly hasting to snatch away those infinitely dear, like to their very souls! Why is this so?
-------------

34 . பேதைமை /  Ch. 34. Utter Folly

331. இறப்பை எண்ணாது களித்திருத்தல் பேதைமை. 
கொலைஞர் உலையேற்றித் தீமடுப்ப ஆமை 
நிலையறியா தந்நீர் படிந்தாடி யற்றே 
கொலைவல் பெருங்கூற்றம் கோள்பார்ப்ப ஈண்டை 
வலையகத்துச் செம்மாப்பார் மாண்பு. 
Men disport themselves in the very meshes of death's net. 
While the turtle's murderers have put it into the pot, and kindled fire beneath, it sports unconscious of its fate: such is their worth who joy entangled in life's not, while death, the mighty murderer, waits to seize them. 

332. நாளும் அறவினை செய்வது நன்று. 
பெருங்கடலாடிய சென்றார் ஒருங்குடன் 
ஓசை அவிந்தபின் ஆடுதும் என்றற்றால் 
இற்செய் குறைவினை நீக்கி அறவினை 
மற்றறிவாம் என்றிருப்பார் மாண்பு. 
Postponing virtuous action to a time that never arrives. 
They went to bathe in the great sea, but cried 'we will wait till all its roar is hushed, then bathe!' Such is their worth who say, 'we will get rid of all our household toils and cares and then we will practise virtue and be wise.' 

333. முத்திக்கு உரிய அறத்தை முன்புரிக. 
குலம்தவம் கல்வி குடிமைமூப் பைந்தும் 
விலங்காமல் எய்தியக் கண்ணும் — நலஞ்சான்ற 
மையறு தொல்சீர் உலகம் அறியாமை 
நெய்யிலாப் பாற்சோற்றின் நேர். 
A high tone of manners and morals. 
Though a man be of good caste, have performed deeds of ascetic virtue, acquired learning, is of good family and attained a ripe old age, so that in these five points he is faultless; yet his ignorance of what is thoroughly good, without stain, sanctioned by ancient precedent, and of good renown in the world's ways, will render all his advantages like thin, watery milk with boiled rice.

334. கடையாய மாக்களிற் கல்லே பயன்தரும். 
கல்நனி நல்ல கடையாய மாக்களின் 
சொல்நனி தாமுணரா வாயினும் — இன்னினியே 
நிற்றல் இருத்தல் கிடத்தல் இயங்குதலென் 
முற்றவர்க்குத் தாம்உதவ லான். 
Stones and senseless men. 
Stones are much better than low men ; since, though those (too) are utterly without apprehension of your words, yet they (stones) are of assistance to those that employ them, inasmuch as they at once stand (where they are fixed), remain (where they are put), lie (where they are laid), and remove (when they are moved). 

335. பேதையர் நாக்குத் தீயசொற் பேசும். 
பெறுவதொன் றின்றியும் பெற்றானே போலக் 
கறுவுகொண் டேலாதார் மாட்டும் — கறுவினால் 
கோத்தின்னா கூறி உரையாக்காற் பேதைக்கு 
நாத்தின்னும் நல்ல சுனைத்து. 
A fool angry without cause, longs to abuse. 
If the fool, though nothing is to be gained (by such conduct), acting as though he had gained something, waxing wroth against those who disdain (or are unable) to contend with him, cannot say and utter forth in his wrath a string of evil words a grievous itching will gnaw his tongue. 

336. மேதையர் திருத்தினும் பேதையர் திருந்தார். 
தங்கண் மரபில்லார் பின்சென்று தாமவரை 
எங்கண் வணக்குது மென்பவர் — புன்கேண்மை 
நற்றளிர்ப் புன்னை மலருங் கடற்சேர்ப்ப 
கற்கிள்ளிக் கையிழந் தற்று. 
It is a hard thankless task to bend the worthless to our will. 
Lord of the sea-shore where the laurel with its bright foliage flowers! The poor (pretence of) intimacy enjoyed by those who follow after (wealthy but) utterly uncongenial men, and say 'we will bend them to our will,' is like loosing one's hand while digging into a rock. 

337. செல்வரைச் சூழ்ந்தே திரிவர் பேதையர். 
ஆகா தெனினும் அகத்துநெய் உண்டாகின் 
போகா தெறும்பு புறஞ்சுற்றும் — யாதுங் 
கொடா அரெனினும் உடையாரைப் பற்றி 
விடாஅர் உலகத் தவர். 
Ants around the neck of the closed oil-jar. 
If there be ghi in the pot, though they cannot get at it, the ants will swarm without ceasing around the outside ; and so the people of the world will cling to and not leave the possessors of wealth, though these give them nothing. 

338. நலம் செய்யா வாழ்க்கையும் நாடுவர் அறிவிலார். 
நல்லவை நாடொறும் எய்தார் அறஞ்செய்யார் 
இல்லாதார்க் கியாதொன்றும் ஈகலார் — எல்லாம் 
இனியார்தோள் சேரார் இசைபட வாழார் 
முனியார்கொல் தாம்வாழும் நாள். 
Fools make all life sad for themselves. 
No good each day they gain; nor deed of virtue do; nothing to needy men impart; nor know they joy of loved ones' sweet embrace ; devoid of fame they live: do such not loathe the days they live? 

339. விரும்பினோர் கேண்மை விரும்புவர் அறிஞர். 
விழைந்தொருவர் தம்மை வியப்ப ஒருவர் 
விழைந்திலேம் என்றிருக்கும் கேண்மை — தழங்குகுரல் 
பாய்திரைசூழ் வையம் பயப்பினும் இன்னாதே 
ஆய்நலம் இல்லாதார் மாட்டு. 
Friendship without reciprocity. 
Friendship with those who are destitute of exquisite goodness, and who, though you cultivate them with affectionate deference, (morosely) say we entertain affection for none,'—though it should yield as its fruit the earth, which the sea with its noisy chime of leaping billows girds around,—would be only affliction.

340. தம்புகழ் தாமே கூறின் இழிவாம். 
கற்றனவும் கண்ணகன்ற சாயலும் இற்பிறப்பும் 
பக்கத்தார் பாராட்டப் பாடெய்தும்; —தானுரைப்பின் 
மைத்துனர் பல்கி மருந்தின் தணியாத 
பித்தனென் றெள்ளப் படும். 
Self-laudation. 
The learning a man has acquired, his world - renowned excellence, and his nobility of birth, will gain for him respect when the bystanders celebrate them; but if he himself proclaim them, the young kinsmen crowding around will deride him as one afflicted with a mania not to be mitigated by any medicine. 
-----------

35. கீழ்மை / Ch. 35. Lowness

341. அறிஞர் அறவுரை கேளார் கீழோர். 
கப்பி கடவதாக் காலைத்தன் வாய்ப்பெயினும் 
குப்பை கிளைப்போவாக் கோழிபோல் — மிக்க 
கனம்பொதிந்த நூல்விரித்துக் காட்டினும் கீழ்தன் 
மனம்புரிந்த வாறே மிகும். 
Teaching wasted. 
The fowl, though each morning duly you scatter broken grain into its very mouth, will ceaselessly scratch in the refuse-heap; so, though you expound and show the base man works of learning, full of weighty wisdom, he will but the more resolutely go on in the way in which his mind finds delight. 

342. மேலோர் இடத்திற் கீழோர் அணுகார். 
காழாய கொண்டு கசடற்றார் தஞ்சாரல் 
தாழாது போவாம் எனஉரைப்பின்—கீழ்தான் 
உறங்குவாம் என்றெழுந்து போமாம்அஃ தன்றி 
மறங்குமாம் மற்றொன் றுரைத்து. 
The base will not seek the company of the wise and good. 
If you say to the base man, ‘Let us without delay go to seek refuge with faultless sages possessors of mature wisdom,' he will probably get up and make off, exclaiming, 'Let us go and slumber,!’ or he will perhaps demur, and change the subject. 

343. கீழ்மக்கள் செல்வத்தினும் மேன்மைப்பண்பு அறியார். 
பெருநடை தாம்பெறினும் பெற்றி பிழையா 
தொருடைய ராகுவர் சான்றோர் — பெருநடை 
பெற்றக் கடைத்தும் பிறங்கருவி நன்னாட! 
வற்றாம் ஒருநடை கீழ். 
Promotion does not spoil the good nor improve the bad 
Lord of the goodly land of swelling torrents! If thoroughly worthy men gain some added dignity, their nature knows no deviation, but they go on in the same even path of virtue ; and although the base obtain promotion, his conduct too changes not, (promotion betters him not.) 

344. தினைத்தனை நன்றியும் நினைப்பர் சான்றோர். 
தினையனைத்தே யாயினும் செய்தநன் றுண்டால் 
பனையனைத்தா உள்ளுவர் சான்றோர் — பனையனைத்(து) 
என்றுஞ் செயினும் இலங்கருவி நன்னாட! 
நன்றில நன்றறியார் மாட்டு. 
Small benefits seem great to the wise ; and vice versa. 
Lord of the goodly land of glistening torrents ! The excellent will deem any favour done them, though small as a grain of millet, to be large as a palm tree. You may constantly confer favours huge as a palm tree, but they are not benefits, when conferred on those who are not grateful. 

345. பெருமைச் செயல்கள் புரியார் கீழோர். 
பொற்கலத் தூட்டிப் புறந்தரினும் நாய்பிறர் 
எச்சிற் கிமையாது பார்த்திருக்கும் — அச்சீர் 
பெருமை யுடைத்தாக் கொளினும்கீழ் செய்யுள் 
கருமங்கள் வேறு படும். 
The dog prefers to feed on refuse. Nature will out! 
The dog, though you tend it with care, feeding it from a golden vessel, will watch, eye fixed for others' leavings ; even so, although you receive the base as if they were possessed of greatness, the deeds they do will be otherwise (= their real character will be seen by their conduct). 

346. கீழ்மகன் தன்னை மேல்என எண்ணுவான். 
சக்கரச் செல்வம் பெறினும் விழுமியோர் 
எக்காலுஞ் சொல்லார் மிகுதிச்சொல் — எக்காலும் 
முந்திரிமேற் காணி மிகுவதேல் கீழ்தன்னை 
இந்திரனா எண்ணி விடும். 
The base intoxicated by some trivial gain. 
Though they obtain imperial wealth, the excellent never utter a vaunting word ; but if at any time the base see some small fraction added to his scanty store, he will deem himself great as Indra. 

347. செய்யுந் தொழிலாற் சிறியவரை அறியலாம். 
மைதீர் பசும்பொன்மேல் மாண்ட மணியழுத்திச் 
செய்த தெனினும் செருப்புத்தன் காற்கேயாம் 
எய்திய செல்வத்த ராயினும் கீழ்களைச் 
செய்தொழிலாற் காணப் படும் 
The slipper. 
Though made of faultless yellow gold, enwrought with choicest pearls, the slipper serves but for one's foot; though the base be deemed prosperous through the wealth they have gained, their baseness will be seen by their actions. 

348. துன்பம் விளைக்கும் கீழ்மக்கள் தொழில்கள். 
கடுக்கெனச் சொல்வற்றாம் கண்ணோட்ட மின்றாம் 
இடுக்கண் பிறர்மாட் டுவக்கும் — அடுத்தடுத்து 
வேக முடைத்தாம் விறன்மலை நன்னாட! 
ஏகுமாம் எள்ளுமாம் கீழ். 
The base man's habit of life. Victorious lord of the good mountain land! The base is mighty in bitter words, is destitute of kindliness, rejoices in others' sorrows, is ever and anon full of sudden wrath, will run up and down and pour contempt on all he meets. 

349. பன்னாட் பின்செலின் கீழ்மக்கள் பழிப்பார். 
பழைய ரிவரென்று பன்னாட்பின் நிற்பின் 
உழைஇனிய ராகுவர் சான்றோர்—விழையாதே 
கள்ளுயிர்க்கும் நெய்தற் கனைகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப! 
எள்ளுவர் கீழா யவர். 
No intimacy possible with the base. 
Lord of the resounding sea's cool shore, where the Neythal breathes honied fragrance round! The worthy, if men for many days stand waiting in their train will say 'these are old acquaintance,' and will make the place pleasant to them; the base in such circumstances feel no affection, but simply despise them. 

350. செல்வத்திலும் கீழ்மக்கன் செய்யார் நல்வினை. 
கொய்புல் கொடுத்துக் குறைத்தென்றுந் தீற்றினும் 
வையம்பூண் கல்லா சிறுகுண்டை — ஐயகேள்! 
எய்திய செல்வத்த ராயினும் கீழ்களைச் 
செய்தொழிலாற் காணப் படும். 
Prosperity does not elevate the base. 
Hear, O Sir! The little bullock-calves will not learn to bear the yoke and draw the chariot, though you give them cut grass, clip them, and constantly rub them down; so, though they have gained wealth, the base will be seen (to be so) by the deeds they do. 
-----------------

36. கயமை /Ch. 36. Baseness

351. தீய தொழிலையே செய்வர் கயவர். 
ஆர்த்த அறிவினர் ஆண்டிளைய ராயினும் 
காத்தோம்பித் தம்மை அடக்குப — மூத்தொறூஉம் 
தீத்தொழிலே கன்றித் திரிதந் தெருவைபோல் 
போத்தறார் புல்லறிவி னார். 
Age does not improve the essentially base. 
The thoroughly wise, though young in years, will guard themselves in stern self-repression. The low unwise as age comes on become mature in evil works, and are like reeds wind-shaken, hollow still! 

352. கயவர் நூல்கற்பினும் நுண்ணறிவு நண்ணார். 
செழும்பெரும் பொய்கையுள் வாழினும் என்றும் 
வழும்பறுக்க கில்லாவாம் தேரை — வழும்பில்சீர் 
நூல்கற்றக் கண்ணும் நுணுக்கமொன் றில்லாதார் 
தேர்கிற்கும் பெற்றி அரிது. 
Fine perception unattainable by the obtuse. 
Though frogs flourish long in a rich large lake, they never rid themselves of their slime; so it is hard for those void of fine perception, even when they have learned pure and excellent text-books, to acquire the gift of clear understanding. 

353. முன்நின்று எவர்குற்றமும் மொழிவார் கயவர். 
கணமலை நன்னாட! கண் இன் றொருவர் 
குணனேயுங் கூறற் கரிதால் — குணனழுங்கக் 
குற்றம் உழைநின்று கூறுஞ் சிறியவர்கட் 
கெற்றால் இயன்றதோ நா. 
Detraction easy only to the base. 
Lord of the goodly land of mountain chains ! It is hard to stand before a man, and publish even his praise. How then can mean men's tongues depreciate a man's good qualities and proclaim his faults while standing before him?. 

354. கயவர் தம் மதிப்பைக் காட்டியே நடப்பார். 
கோடேந் தகலல்குற் பெண்டிர்தம் பெண்ணிர்மை 
சேடியர் போலச் செயல்தேற்றார் — கூடிப் 
புதுப்பெருக்கம் போலத்தம் பெண்ணீர்மை காட்டி 
மதித்திறப்பர் மற்றை யவர். 
Base men vaunt themselves like wantons. 
Chaste women trick not out their charms of womanhood, as is as the wont of the wanton. Like fountains ever fresh those others make display of every charm, and vaunt their beauty as they pass. 

355. கயவர் வருத்தினோர்க்குப் பயன் தருவர். 
தளிர்மேலே நிற்பினும் தட்டாமற் செல்லா 
உளி நீரார் மாதோ கயவர் — அளிநீரார்க் 
கென்னானுஞ் செய்யார் எனைத்தானுஞ் செய்பவே 
இன்னாங்கு செய்வார்ப் பெறின். 
You must extort from the base what you want. 
The base are like the chisel, that, though it is over the bud (to be sculptured), moves not without some one to strike it. On those who are courteous these confer no boon whatever. They will do everything for those who use violent means.

356. தனைப்பிறர் வைத்ததை நினைப்பான் கயவன். 
மலைநலம் உள்ளும் குறவன் ; பயந்த 
விளைநிலம் உள்ளும் உழவன் ; சிறந்தொருவர் 
செய்தநன் றுள்ளுவர் சான்றோர் ; கயம்தன்னை 
வைததை உள்ளி விடும். 
Each thinks upon his own favourite place. The good remember only benefits conferred on them ; the bad only injuries. 
The hill-man thinks upon the beauty of his hills; the farmer thinks upon his fields that have yielded him rich crops; the good think on the boons bestowed by worthy men; the base man's thoughts are fixed on abuse he has received. 

357. எத்துணை நன்றியும் எண்ணான் கீழ்மகன். 
ஒருநன்றி செய்தவர்க் கொன்றி யெழுந்த 
பிழைநூறும் சான்றோர் பொறுப்பர் — கயவர்க் 
கெழுநூறு நன்றிசெய் தொன்றுதீ தாயின் 
எழுநூறும் தீதாய் விடும். 
The good are grateful; the base ungrateful and malignant. 
The good attach themselves to those that have done them one act of kindness, and forgive a hundred wrongs that arise. The base receive seven hundred benefits, but one wrong will turn them all to evil. 

358. நல்லோர் தளர்வினும் நற்செயல் புரிவார். 
ஏட்டைப் பருவத்தும் இற்பிறந்தார் செய்வன 
மோட்டிடத்தும் செய்யார் முழுமக்கள் — கோட்டை 
வயிரம் செறிப்பினும் வாட்கண்ணாய்! பன்றி 
செயிர்வேழ மாகுதல் இன்று. 
Base men illiberal even in prosperity. 
Worthless persons even in high estate do not the deeds that men of noble birth perform even in their poverty. Okeen-eyed maid! Men may enring and arm the boar's tusks, but it will not even so become a warlike elephant. 

359. கயவர் மரையிலைபோற் பயனின்றி மாய்வர். 
இன்றாதும் இந்நிலையே ஆதும் இனிச்சிறிது 
நின்றதும் என்று நினைத்திருந்து — ஒன்றி 
உரையின் மகிழ்ந்து தம் உள்ளம்வேறாகி
 மரையிலையின் மாய்ந்தார் பலர். 
Vain dreams. We fade as a leaf. 
‘To-day, at once, a little hence, we shall gain our end!’ So many speak and think, and joyously tell it out among their friends ; but soon their eager minds are changed; and they have perished like a lotus leaf. 

360. கல்நெஞ்சர் செல்வக்காலத்திலும் கயவர். 
நீருட் பிறந்து நிறம்பசிய தாயினும் 
ஈரம் கிடையாகத் தில்லாகும் — ஓரும் 
நிறைப்பெருஞ் செல்வத்து நின்றக் கடைத்தும் 
அறைப்பெருங்கல் அன்னார் உடைத்து. 
Wealth without heart. 
Though born in the water, and its hue appear green, the Netti's pith knows no moisture; so in the world are men of amplest wealth whose hearts are hard as stones upon the rocky mountain fell.
-------------

37. பன்னெறி / Ch. 37. Miscellaneous Topics.

361. கற்புடைய பெண் இல்லா வீடு காடாம். 
மழைதிளைக்கும் மாடமாய் மாண்பமைந்த காப்பாய் 
இழைவிளக்கு நின்றிமைப்பின் என்னாம் — விழைதக்க 
மாண்ட மனையாளை யில்லாதான் இல்லகம் 
காண்டற் கரியதோர் காடு. 
The wife. 
The mansion meets the clouds. A stately band of warders keep watch around. Gems glisten therein like lamps. What then? Where the owner has not a wife of dainty excellence: the house within is a waste, hard to explore. 

362. மங்கையர் கற்பின் நிற்பது மாண்பு 
வழுக்கெனைத்தும் இல்லாத வாள்வாய்க் கிடந்தும் 
இழுக்கினைத் தாம்பெறுவ ராயின் — இழுக்கெனைத்துஞ் 
செய்குறாப் பாணி சிறிதேஅச் சின்மொழியார் 
கையுறாப் பாணி பெரிது. 
Outward guards avail nothing. 
Though compassed round with a faultless guard of swords, ifonce they gain freedom, in little time they are stained with every fault; and long is the time those soft-voiced once spurn every law of right 

363. கற்பிலா மகளிர் கணவற்குக் கூற்றம். 
எறியென் றெதிர்நிற்பாள் கூற்றம் ; சிறுகாலை 
அட்டில் புகாதாள் அரும்பிணி;— அட்டதனை 
உண்டி உதவாதாள் இல்வாழ்பேய் : இம்மூவர் 
கொண்டானைக் கொல்லும் படை. 
The evil qualities of a bad wife and their effects. 
Death is the wife that stands and dares her spouse to strike! Disease is she who enters not the kitchen betimes! Demon domestic is she who cooks and gives no alms! These three are swords to slay their lords ! 

364. பெண்டிரைத் துறவா திருப்பது பேதைமை. 
கடியெனக் கேட்டுங் கடியான் வெடிபட 
ஆர்ப்பது கேட்டும் அதுதெளியான் — பேர்த்தும்ஓர் 
இற்கொண் டினிதிரூஉம் ஏமுறுதல் என்பவே 
கற்கொண் டெறியுந் தவறு. 
The second marriage. 
He hears (that marriage is another name for) dread, and yet he dreads it not! He hears the fearful funeral drum, but it gives him no sense ! Again to take a wife and to dwell bewildered amidst domestic enjoyments is a fault that merits stoning; sosay (the wise). 

365. தவம் செய்வது தலைமை வாழ்வு. 
தலையே தவம்முயன்று வாழ்தல் ; ஒருவர்க் 
கிடையே இனியார்கண் தங்கல் ; —கடையே 
புணராதென் றெண்ணிப் பொருள்நசையால் தம்மை 
உணரார்பின் சென்று நிலை. 
Different modes of life. 
The best thing is a life spent in penitential practices. The middle course is to live with dear ones around. The worst of all is, with the thought that we have not enough, through desire of wealth subserviently to follow those who understand us not. 

366. உயர்ந்தோர் பலநூல் உணர்ந்துநாள் கழிப்பர். 
கல்லாக் கழிப்பர் தலையாயார்; நல்லவை 
துவ்வாக் கழிப்பர் இடைகள் ; கடைகள் 
இனிதுண்ணேம் ஆரப் பெறேம்யாம என்னும் 
முனிவினாற் கண்பா டிலர். 
Three kinds of men; those that learn, those that enjoy, and those that complain. The men of noblest mood pass their time in learning. The middle sort pass their time in the enjoyment of good things. The last and lowest cry : 'Our food is not sweet,' 'We've not got our fill,' and in angry mood lie sleepless. 

367.  தந்தை யறிவே மைந்தன் அறிவாம். 
செந்நெல்லா லாய செழுமுளை மற்றும்அச் 
செந்நெல்லே யாகி விளைதலால் — அந்நெல் 
வயல்நிறையக் காய்க்கும் வளவய லூர! 
மகனறிவு தந்தை யறிவு. 
Like father, like son! The red grain's swelling germ in after time grows up and yields that same red grain.— O fertile crofted village lord, whose fields are filled with ripening crops of that same grain !—Wisdom of son is wisdom of the sire. 

368. கீழ்மேல்ஆக மேல்கீழ்ஆக வாழ்வர் உலகில். 
உடைப்பெருஞ் செல்வரும் சான்றோரும் கெட்டுப் 
புடைப்பெண்டிர் மக்களும் கீழும் பெருகிக் 
கடைக்கால் தலைக்கண்ண தாகிக் குடைக்கால்போற் 
கீழ்மேலாய் நிற்கும் உலகு. 
Bad times. 
The wealthy men of great possessions and the perfect have perished, while wantons' sons and base men multiply. The lowest takes chief place, and, like the umbrella's handle, this world is upside down! 

369. அன்பர் குறைநீக்காத வாழ்வு நன்றன்று. 
இனியார்தம் நெஞ்சத்து நோய்உரைப்ப அந்நோய் 
தணியாத உள்ளம் உடையார் — மணிவரன்றி 
விழும் அருவி விறன்மலை நன்னாட! 
வாழ்வின் வரைபாய்தல் நன்று. 
Misery of unfeeling selfishness. 
Lord of the good land of mighty hills whence streams descend sweeping along pearls! 
Better men should jump down a precipice than live with a mind not disposed to assuage the pain of the dear ones who tell them of their heart's pain. 

370. வெள்ளம் போன்றது வேசையர் நட்பு. 
புதுப்புனலும் பூங்குழையார் நட்பும் இரண்டும் 
விதுப்பற நாடின்வேறல்ல — புதுப்புனலும் 
மாரி அறவே அறுமே, அவரன்பும் 
வாரி அறவே அறும். 
The wantons' love. 
‘The mountain freshed, and the love of those adorned 
With pendant jewels rare examined calmly prove 
To differ nought: that fails when rains that feed it fail; 
And love of these fails too, when income fails !’
------------

38. பொதுமகளிர் /  Ch. 38. Wantons

371. விளக்கின் ஒளிபோன்றது வேசையர் நட்பு. 
விளக்கொளியும் வேசையர் நட்பும் இரண்டும் 
துளக்கற நாடின் வேறல்ல — விளக்கொளியும் 
நெய்யற்ற கண்ணே அறுமே, அவரன்பும் 
கையற்ற கண்ணே அறும். 
The wantons' mercenary character. 
The lamp's light and harlot's love examined well are seen to differ not a whit; the lamp's light goes out when the feeding oil is consumed ! and the harlot's love is spent when the lavish hand has spent its wealth. 

372. பொதுப்பெண்டிர் அன்பு பொய்யன்பு ஆகும். 
அங்கோட் டகலல்குல் ஆயிழையாள் நம்மோடு 
செங்கோடு பாய்துமே என்றாள்மன் — செங்கோட்டின் 
மேற்காண மின்மையான் மேவா தொழிந்தாளே 
காற்கால்நோய் காட்டிக் கலுழ்ந்து. 
The wanton's self-interested professions. 
She (of enticing beauty), adorned with choice jewels, said forsooth, 'I will leap with you down the steep precipice;' but on the very brow of the precipice, because I had no money, she, weeping and pointing to her aching feet, withdrew and left me alone! 

373. பொருளிலாதவரைப் போக்குவர் பரத்தையர். 
அங்கண் விசும்பின் அமரர் தொழப்படும் 
செங்கண்மா லாயினும் ஆகமன் — தம்கைக் 
கொடுப்பதொன் றில்லாரைக் கொய்தளி ரன்னார் 
விடுப்பர்தம் கையால் தொழுது. 
Courtezans forsake those who have no wealth. 
Though he be Mal, the fiery-eyed, whom in the heaven's fair homes immortals worship, if in hand he bring no gift the women tender as the buds men cull, will straight dismiss him, bowing low with folded hands. 

374. புலையனும் பொருள்தரின் விலைமகள் புணர்வன். 
ஆணமில் நெஞ்சத் தணிநீலக் கண்ணார்க்குக் 
காண மிலாதார் கடுவனையர் — காணவே 
செக்கூர்ந்து கொண்டாரும் செய்த பொருளுடையார் 
அக்காரம் அன்னார் அவர்க்கு. 
Money makes a man the wanton's darling. 
To the damsels of loveless hearts, whose eyes are as beauteous as blue water-lilies, those who have no wealth are as poison! Even those who have turned the (oil) press, in sight of all men, if they have wealth, are as sugar to them. 

375. வெள்ளறிவு உடையவர் விரும்புவர் வேசையை. 
பாம்பிற் கொருதலை காட்டி ஒருதலை 
தேம்படு தெண்கயத்து மீன் காட்டும் — ஆங்கு 
மலங்கன்ன செய்கை மகளிர்தோள் சேர்வார் 
விலங்கன்ன வெள்ளறிவி னார். 
Wantons and their paramours. 
The silly ones, who are as beasts, seek the embraces of women who are like the eel, which shows one head to the snake, and another head to the fish, in the sweet clear lake : (are of a double and deceitful nature). 

376. பரத்தை சொல் நம்பினோர் பழிக்கப்படுவார். 
பொத்தநூற் கல்லும் புணர்பிரியா அன்றிலும்போல் 
நித்தலும் நம்மைப் பிரியலம் என்றுரைத்த 
பொற்றொடியும் பேர்த்தகர்க்கோ டாயினாள் நன்னெஞ்சே 
நிற்றியோ போதியோ நீ. 
Feigned love becomes open hostility. 
‘We will never part, like the precious stone strung on its thread, or the Andril,' said the damsel with golden bracelets: she has now become the horn of a fighting ram (she angrily repels me). Dear heart! dost linger still, or wilt thou go? 

377. நகைக்கப்படுவார் வேசையை நம்பினோர். 
ஆமாபோல் நக்கி அவர்கைப் பொருள்கொண்டு 
சேமாபோல் குப்புறூஉம் சில்லைக்கண் அன்பினை 
ஏமாந் தெமதென்றிருந்தார் பெறுபவே 
தாமாம் பலரால் நகை. 
Ridiculous infatuation of the wanton's dupe. 
Those who fondly reckon upon the devoted love of the worthless wanton, that, like the wild ox, licks the hand and despoils men of their wealth, and then, like the buffalo, bounds away, shall suffer the deserved ridicule of many. 

378. நன்னெறி வாழ்க்கையர் விலைமகளை நாடார். 
ஏமாந்த போழ்தின் இனியார்போன் றின்னாராய்த் 
தாமார்ந்த போதே தகர்க்கோடாம் — மான்நோக்கின்
 தந்நெறிப் பெண்டிர் தடமுலை சேராரே 
செந்நெறிச் சேர்த்துமென் பார். 
Bought embraces. 
Those whose avowed purpose it is to walk in the way of rectitude seek not the embrace of the fascinating, fawn-eyed damsels, who walk in a way of their own' who are pleasant when gratified with gifts, and when they are filled( =when no more gifts are to be expected) are like the horn of the fighting ram. 

379. பொருட்பெண்டிர் எவர்க்கும் உரிமையர் அல்லர். 
ஊறுசெய் நெஞ்சம்தம் உள்ளடக்கி ஒண்ணுதலார் 
தேற மொழிந்த மொழிகேட்டுத் — தேறி 
எமரென்று கொள்வாருங் கொள்பவே யார்க்கும்
தமரல்லர் தம்உடம்பி னார். 
Let him be deceived that will. 
Let those accept (wantons' false love), who take them as their own believing the words uttered to inspire belief, by the bright-browed ones, who keep concealed within the cruelty that lurks in their heart. Those whose bodies are their sole wealth belong to none, (i. e. they have no souls to give!). 

380. பாவம் நிறைந்தவர் பரத்தையர் வசத்தர். 
உள்ளம் ஒருவன் உழையதா ஒண்ணுதலார் 
கள்ளத்தால் செய்யுங் கருத்தெல்லாம் — தெள்ளி 
அறிந்த விடத்தும் அறியாராம் பாவம் 
செறிந்த உடம்பி னவர். 
Lust blinds men. 
Though the dupes clearly discern and know the guileful intentions entertained by the bright browed ones, even where their minds are (apparently) set upon some persons, they whose bodies are full of sin do not recognise it!
---------

39 . கற்புடை மகளிர் / Ch. 39. Chaste Matronhood
 
381. அயலவர் மயல்கொன அணியார் மகளிர். 
அரும்பெறற் கற்பின் அயிராணி யன்ன 
பெரும் பெயர்ப் பெண்டி ரெனினும் — விரும்பி 
பெறுநசையாற் பின்நிற்பாரின்மையே பேணும் 
நறுநுதலாள் நன்மைத் துணை. 
Freedom from temptation. 
Though women live famed as Ayirani for rarest gift of chastity, absence of men that stand enamoured of their charms is a help in way of good to those of fragrant brow who guard themselves.

382. வறுமையினும் விருந்தோம்புவார் மங்கையர். 
குடநீர்அட் டுண்ணும் இடுக்கட் பொழுதும் 
கடல்நீர் அறவுண்ணும் கேளிர் வரினும் 
கடன்நீர்மை கையாறாக் கொள்ளும் மடமொழி 
மாதர் மனைமாட்சி யாள். 
A true wife, in time of poverty, if friends come in enough to drink up the sea, performs 
her duties with kindness of speech. 
When in the straitened time they cook and eat with but one pot of water on the hearth,— if relatives arrive enough to drain the sea, the soft-voiced dame, the glory of her home, well fulfils each seemly duty. 

383. கற்புடைமங்கைவாழ் இற்சிறப்புக் காண்க. 
நாலாறும் ஆறாய் நனிசிறிதாய் எப்புறனும் 
மேலாறு மேல்உறை சோரினும் — மேலாய 
வல்லாளாய் வாழும்ஊர் தற்புகழும் மாண்கற்பின் 
இல்லாள் அமர்ந்ததே இல். 
The real home! 
On every side the narrow dwelling lies open, on every part the rain drips down; yet, if the dame has noble gifts, praised by townsfolk for her modest worth, such a housewife's blest abode is indeed a home!
384. கணவனை மகிழ்விப்பவள் கற்புடைப் பெண். 
கட்கினியாள் காதலன் காதல் வகைபுனைவாள் 
உட்குடையாள் ஊர்நாண் இயல்பினாள் — உட்கி 
இடன்அறிந் தூடி இனிதின் உணரும் 
மடமொழி மாதராள் பெண். 
The wife : 'placens uxor.' 
She is sweet to the eye, and adorned in the way that a lover loves; she enforces awe: her virtue shames the village folk; she is submissive; but in fitting place is stern, yet sweetly relents :—such a soft-voiced dame is a wife. 

385. நாணுடையவரே பேணுவார் கற்பினை. 
எஞ்ஞான்றும் எம்கணவர் எம்தோள்மேற் சேர்ந்தெழினும் 
அஞ்ஞான்று கண்டேம்போல் நாணுதுமால் — எஞ்ஞான்றும் 
என்னை கெழீஇயினர் கொல்லோ பொருள்நசையால் 
பன்மார்பு சேர்ந்தொழுகு வார். 
The modest woman cannot understand shamelessness. 
‘Whenever our spouse takes us in his embrace, we feel a timid shame as if we saw him then for the first time and they (wantons) daily, through desire of gain, submit to the embraces of many! How can this be?'

386. நாண்முதல் நாற்குணம் நல்லார்க்கு அணிகலன். 
உள்ளத் துணர்வுடையான் ஓதிய நூலற்றால் 
வள்ளன்மை பூண்டான்கண் ஒண்பொருள் — தெள்ளிய 
ஆண்மகன் கையில் அயில்வா ளனைத்தரோ 
நாணுடையாள் பெற்ற நலம். 
A modest wife like a javelin in the hand of a hero 
As the scroll that he reads, whose inmost heart well understands it, is goodly wealth with him who is graced by a generous spirit. As a keen weapon in the hand of a clear-souled hero, is the loveliness that a modest woman owns. 

387. காதலன் புறத்தொழுக்கம் காணின் வெறுப்பான் காதலி. 
கருங்கொள்ளும் செங்கொள்ளும் தூணிப் பதக்கென் 
றொருங்கொப்பக் கொண்டானாம் ஊரன் - ஒருங்கொவ்வா 
நன்னுதலார்த் தோய்ந்த வரைமார்பன் நீராடா 
தென்னையும் தோய வரும். 
The injured wife to her confidante: 
'The lord of the town has bought, it seems, black gram and red gram, a tuni and a pathakku, as if they were all the same! He, whose chest is broad as a mountain, having associated with the beautiful browed ones , — inferior to me! — unpurified, seeks my society too!' 

388. துணைவனைத் திருத்த முயல்வாள் துணைவி. 
கொடியவை கூறாதி பாண!நீ கூறின் 
அடிபைய இட்டொதுங்கிச் சென்று — துடியின் 
இடக்கண் அனையம்யாம் ஊரற் கதனால் 
வலக்கண் அனையார்க் குரை. 
The neglected wife 
‘O minstrel, utter not cruel words, or if thou utter them, softly draw back thy step, and go to utter them to those who are like the lute's right side; for we, to the lord of the town, are as its left.' 

389. கொழுநன் வழுவினும் அன்பிற் குறையான் காதலி. 
சாய்ப்பறிக்க நீர்திகழுந் தண்வய லூரன்மீ 
தீப்பறக்க நொந்தேனும் யானேமன் — தீப்பறக்கத் 
தாக்கி முலை பொருத தண்சாந் தணியகலம் 
நோக்கியிருந்தேனும் யான். 
Meek complainings (to her maid). 
'I am she, forsooth, that felt a pang when a fly alighted on the lord of the town, surrounded by cool rice-fields over which the waters gleam, where they pluck the rich grass! And I am she who have lived to look upon his breast adorned with cool sandal-wood paste, which has been warmly embraced by others. 

390. தலைவன் குறையைக் கருதாள் தலைவி. 
அரும்பவிழ் தாரினான் எம்அருளும் என்று 
பெரும்பொய் உரையாதி பாண — கரும்பின் 
கடைக்கண் அனையம்நாம் ஊரற் கதனால் 
இடைக்கண் அனையார்க் குரை. 
The pining wife 
'Minstrel , utter not a gross falsehood, saying that he who wears a garland of opening buds will favour us!’
‘To the lord of the town we are as the (tasteless) tip of the sugar-cane ; therefore, tell (such a tale) to them who are like its middle (sweet, juicy) joints.' 

பொருட்பால் முற்றும் /  End of Part II 
--------------

பகுதி 3 . காமத்துப்பால் /  PART III. ON LOVE (OR PLEASURE)
40. காம நுதலியல் / Ch. 40. The Characteristics of Love

391. கூடலும் ஊடலும் இன்பத்தைக் கூட்டும் 
முயங்காக்கால் பாயும் பசலைமற் றூடி 
உயங்காக்கால் உப்பின்றாம் காமம் — வயங்கோதம் 
நில்லாத் திரையலைக்கும் நீள்கழித் தண்சேர்ப்ப! 
புல்லாப் புலப்பதோர் ஆறு. 
‘The way of true love never did run smooth.' 
'Lord of the cool shore of the deep bay, where the gleaming ocean's restless billows beat! 
'If there be no fond embrace, a sickly hue will spread itself (over her face); and, if there be no lovers' quarrels, love will lack its zest. 
‘To embrace and disagree is the one way (of love).' 

392. காதலர்ப் பிரிவு கடுந்துயர் விளைக்கும் 
தம்அமர் காதலர் தார்சூழ் அணியகலம் 
விம்ம முயங்குந் துணையில்லார்க் -– கிம்மெனப் 
பெய்ய எழிலி முழங்கும் திசையெல்லாம் 
நெய்தல் அறைந்தன்ன நீர்த்து. 
The Lonely one
‘To those who were wont to strain in close embrace their own beloved whose broad breast was girt with garlands, when the rains patter down, it is as though one beat the funeral drum through all the regions where the muttering of the thunder is heard from out the clouds; since they are deprived of their loved one's society.' 

393. பிரிந்தோர்க்கு மாலை மையலைப் பெருக்கும் 
கம்மஞ்செய் மாக்கள் கருவி ஒடுக்கிய 
மம்மர்கொள் மாலை மலராய்ந்து பூத்தொடுப்பாள் 
கைம்மாலை இட்டுக் கலுழ்ந்தாள் துணையில்லார்க் 
கிம்மாலை என்செய்வதென்று. 
The forsaken one at eventide
At wildering eventide, when workmen all put by their tools, she culled choice flowers, and wove a gay garland ; — then let it fall from her hands, and wailed, 'What can this wreath avail to me who weep alone?’

394. கணவன் வருநாட்குறித்து வருந்துவள் காதலி 
செல்சுடர் நோக்கிச் சிதரரிக்கண் கொண்டநீர் 
மெல்விரல் ஊழ்தெரியா விம்மித்தன் — மெல்விரலின் 
நாள்வைத்து நங்குற்றம் எண்ணுங்கொல் அந்தோதன் 
தோள்வைத் தணைமேற் கிடந்து. 
The lover says to his friend (பாகன்) in regard to his forsaken bride : 
'Regarding the setting sun, and wiping away one by one with her soft finger the tears that well up in her eyes, suffused with red, sobbing she lies resting her arms on the couch, setting off the days on those same tender fingers : alas; are they my faults she is counting up?' 

395. தலைவி நலம் பாராட்டுவன் தலைவன் 
கண்கயல் என்னுங் கருத்தினால் காதலி 
பின்சென்ற தம்ம சிறுசிரல் — பின்சென்றும் 
ஊக்கி எழுந்து எறிகல்லா ஒண்புருவம் 
கோட்டிய வில்வாக் கறிந்து. 
The lover in a figure praises the lustre of his beloved's eye, and the beauty of her arched brow; and indicates also his own timid reverence 
‘The little kingfisher seeing the eyes of my beloved (as she was disporting in the tank) and taking them for carp, followed her; but though it followed, and poised itself aloft, it darted not down, recognising her gleaming brow bent above them as a bow! 

396. உடன்போக்கு காதலர்க்கு இன்பத்தை யூட்டும் 
அரக்காம்பல் நாறும்வாய் அம்மருங்கிற் கன்னோ 
பரற்கானம் ஆற்றின கொல்லோ — அரக்கார்ந்த 
பஞ்சிகொண் டூட்டினும் பையெனப் பையெனவென் 
றஞ்சிப்பின் வாங்கும் அடி. 
The mother bewails the hardships of the rough desert path over which her tender daughter will follow her beloved. 
'When I applied the (softest) cotton soaked in the red dye to the foot of her whose waist is lovely, and whose mouth breathes the fragrance of the red water-lily, did she not cry "gently, gently," and shrinking draw it back? And oh! has it endured the stony, desert path? ' 

397. மணந்தார் பிரிந்தால் மாலை வருத்தும் 
ஓலைக் கணக்கர் ஒலியடங்கு புன்செக்கர் 
மாலைப் பொழுதில் மணந்தார் பிரிவுள்ளி 
மாலை பரிந்திட் டழுதாள் வனமுலைமேற 
கோலஞ்செய் சாந்தந் திமிர்ந்து. 
Grief of the deserted wife 
When those who con the palm leaf scrolls had ceased, in eve's din twilight hour, she thought of her absent spouse! and weeping plucked the flowers from out her wreath, and brushed the odorous sandal from her lovely breast! 

398. அன்பு பெரிதும் ஆற்றல் உடையது. 
கடக்கருங் கானத்துக் காளைபின் நாளை 
நடக்கவும் வல்லையோ என்றி— சுடர்த்தொடீஇ 
பெற்றான் ஒருவன பெருங்குதிரை அந்நிலையே 
கற்றான் அஃதூரும் ஆறு. 
The confidante demands of the bride if she can endure to walk after her beloved through the desert, she replies : 
'Thou hast said, O maiden with burnished brace - lets ! have you strength to walk on the morrow after your beloved? When one (a warrior) has obtained a splendid horse, that very instant he has learned how to ride it! (his enthusiasm teaches him). 

399. தாய் அன்பிற் காதலன் அன்பே சிறந்தது. 
முலைக்கண்ணும் முத்தும் முழுமெய்யும் புல்லும் 
இலக்கணம் யாதும் அறியேன் — கலைக்கணம் 
வேங்கை வெரூஉம் நெறிசெலிய போலும்என் 
பூம்பாவை செய்த குறி . 
The mother now aware of her daughter's flight, says: 
‘My breast, my necklace of pearls, and my whole body she embraced ! I knew not what it portended. It was the sign, it seems, made by my lovely one that she was about to set out on the path where the herds of antelopes flee in fright from the tiger.' 

400. பிரிவாற்றாமை பிணியேயாகும் 
கண்மூன் றுடையானும் காக்கையும் பையரவும் 
என்ஈன்ற யாயும் பிழைத்ததென் — பொன்ஈன்ற 
கோங்கரும் பன்ன முலையாய்! பொருள்வயிற் 
பாங்கனார் சென்ற நெறி. 
The lady complains of her lover's long absence 
The triple-eyed (Civan), the crow, the hooded snake; the mother that bare me: what have these done amiss ? Maiden whose bosom bears the Gongu buds, all gold! The way my lover went for wealth is my pain.’

 காமத்துப்பால் முற்றும்.   End of Part III 


F. W. ELLIS' S TRANSLATION OF SOME QUATRAINS 
 [Number Denotes the Number of the Quatrain] 
NALADIYAR 

2. When by blameless means thou hast acquired great wealth, then, sharing it with others, eat fine rice imported on oxen; for fortune never standeth in the centre with any one, but shifteth like the wheel of a chariot. 

3. He who hath gone forth as the leader of armies' mounted on the neck of an elephant and over shadowed by ensigns of dignity, when the power of his former deeds are turned against him, will fall and his wedded wife be taken by strangers. 

4. Know that those things are uncertain which thou regardest as certain and perform quickly every act of charity within thy power; for the days of thy life are gone! are gone l and even now death swiftly approacheth! approacheth! 

7. Death devours your days using the sun, whence they originate, as the measure by which he meteth; be compassionate, therefore, and practice virtue assiduously, foramong all born there is none that bath not died. 

8. Those of little understanding, not considering, their natural tendency, say “we are wealthy'' ; the greatest wealth, may be utterly destroyed and vanish like a flash of lightning darting in the night from a black cloud. 

10. Those who avariciously hoard what they have acquired, vexing their own bodies by stinting themselves in food and raiment, and not perform ing acts of imperishable charity, perish, O King of the mountains touching the sky! Witness the bees when deprived of the honey they have collected. 

32. Say not foolishly, O my soul! "while here let us pursue our own interests and let us die without caring for virtue” ; for, although thou mayest live long and prosper, say what wilt thou do when the days of thy life are passed? 

33. When the senseless man receives the fruit of his deeds, he sighs bitterly and grieves within himself;. the wise, reflecting that it is the destined consequence of their sins, hasten to pass the appointed limit of their affliction and escape from it. 

34. Having obtained a human form so difficult to obtain, act so as from it to acquire great merit; for in the next birth, charity will profit thee as the juice of the sugarcane, while thy body will resemble the refuse of the cane from which the 
juice has been pressed. 

35. They who have pressed the cane and extracted the juice will not be grieved when they see the smoke arising from the refuse while burning, nor will they who have acquired the merit accruing from the mortification of the body mourn when death approacheth. 

36. Think not whether it will be this day, or that day, or what day, but, considering that death even now stands behind thee, eschew evil and pursue good in the way prescribed by the eminent ones. 

38. The seed of the Al (Banyan tree) though exceedingly small grows large and affords abundant shade; so, however small may be the benefit of a virtuous act, it facilitates, when conferred on the worthy, the attainment of heaven. 

59. He who has power to observe the rule he has professed and to keep himself undisturbed by the operation of the organs of sense, namely, the body, mouth, eyes, nose, and ears, shall assuredly obtain eternal beatitude. 

74. Knowing what ought to be known and submitting thereto; fearing what ought to be feared; performing every duty so as to satisfy the world; and living in the enjoyment of pleasure according to their means; they who are thus disposed never experience the evils of life. 

79. Flee from pleasure when thou canst enjoy it, if disgrace attend it; O Lord of the high country abundant in waters! though pleasure only be constantly regarded it is preferable to enjoy it in a harmless way. 

80. Although thyself be ruined, think not of prejudicing others, however, they may deserve it; eat not with those with whom thou shouldest not eat (enemies, irreclaimable sinners, and the rest) even though thou lose the flesh of thy body by hunger; speak not falsehood, intermixed with truth, although the whole world canopied by the heavens be thy reward. 

101.  As a young calf when let loose among a number of cows, naturally seeketh out and attacheth itself to its own mother, in like manner doth the act of a former state of existence seek out and attach itself to him who hath performed it. 

104. To avoid those things which are to happen, or to detain those which are to depart is alike impossible even to Saints; even as there is none who can give rain out of season, or prevent its falling in season. 

107. Behold all those whose bosoms are goaded by distress and who wander forlorn through the long streets, and know, O Lord of the cool shore of the billowy ocean, where the playful swans tear in pieces the water-flowers, that this proceeds from 
the acts of former births. 

108. When those, who not only are not ignorant but have learned that which they ought to know, do that which is blameable ; this, O king of the cool shore of the broad ocean, where the water-lily flings its odours to the winds, proceeds from the acts they have formerly done. 

110. The effect of the acts of former births doth not fall below, nor exceed its due proportion, nor doth it fail to come in its turn, neither doth it assist out of season, but where it ought to be, there it is ; of what utility, therefore, is sorrow when it afflicteth thee? 

116. Although deeply instructed in the knowledge of truth, those who have not accustomed themselves to restraint can never be restrained, O large-eyed beauty! thus, though the wild pumpkin be dressed with salt, clarified butter, milk, curd and various condiments, its natural bitterness will never be removed. 

158. If one be deaf to the secrets of others, blind to the wife of his neighbour, though well acquainted with her excellencies, and dumb in calumniating others, in him it is not necessary to inculcate virtue. 

183. Laying up seed for heaven, without delusion of mind and void of all distress enjoy life like the wise, maintaining your proper station, but remembering always that there are various things that change their nature without efficient cause. 

201. As a mother forgets the pains and trouble she suffered during pregnancy and child-birth, when she sees her infant on her lap; so the distress a man suffers from poverty and other misfourtune disappears on the sight of his relations enquiring for him. 

205. Those who, making no distinctions between dispositions or conditions, relations or strangers, actuated by their natural feelings alone, seek all who are in poverty or affliction and relieve their distress, will be regarded by every one as preeminently worthy. 

206. Than to eat on a golden dish rice, white as the claws of a tiger, mixed with sugar and milk, from the hands of an enemy, it is sweeter to take a mess of grass-reeds, without salt and in any kind of dish, in the house of a relation dear as life. 

208. Even those who hare been pleasantly entertained by another, as frequently as a hammer strikes the anvil, will forsake him as the tongs do the iron on entering the fire! but those who are truly worthy of being called friends, will adhere to him in distress, as the rod by which it is turned adhereth to the metal in the forge. 

209. O thou who are adorned by a cool and fragrant garland! when relations have partaken of the prosperity of their relations, if they partake not, also of their adversity until death, is there anything they can do for them in the other world ? 

211. Friendship with the wise, whose intelligence divines one's thoughts, is like eating a sugarcane from the top (as its sweetness increases more and more); connection with persons without sweetness of disposition is like eating it from the opposite end (the flavour decreasing by degrees). 

213. Avoiding the friendship of those who resemble elephants, seek the friendship of those who resemble dogs; for an elephant will kill his driver, whom he hath known for a long time, but a dog will wag his tail while the spear thrown at him is still in his body. 

214. Men cleave not to those, to whom their hearts cleave not within a short space, though familiar with them for a long time: but will the friendship interwoven with the idea of those intertwined with their hearts, be abandoned, though they are for a long time absent? 

215. The preservation of friendship is when affection continues affection, like the flower of the branch, which being blown, closeth not again! those who resemble the flowers of the pool, which having blown, again close their petals, know neither 
affection, nor friendship. 

221. When those we greatly love and esteem as virtuous, prove otherwise, this ought to be carefully concealed; for rice in the grain hath a husk water foam, and flowers some unfragrant leaves. 

224. O Lord of the wave-resounding shore, where bright-rayed pearls are thrown up by the rolling billows and where float swift-sailing ships! if friends, from whom it is difficult to separate, possess not virtuous dispositions, they are a fire kindled to burn our hearts. 

225. Is it right utterly to abandon friends, whom it is so difficult to forsake, though guilty of evil deeds. O Lord of the renowned mountains, which covered by the long stems of bamboos pierce the sky? Will men cut off their hand because it has struck 
their eye? 

230. If, after contracting a firm friendship with any one I set myself to note his good and bad qualities, may I be cast into the hell, where the traitor, who discovereth the secrets of his friends is punished, and may I be scoffed at by the whole world! 

232. The friendship of eminent men is eminently illustrious, and as productive of benefit as timely rain; but the friendship of the mean even in the time of their prosperity, resembleth, O Lord of the country of clear waters! the failure of rain 
in due season. 

233. The enjoyment of the friendship of men of acute understandings is desirable as the joys of Heaven; but connection with unprofitable men, uninstructed in science and literature, is a very hell. 

234. Our intimacy with those, to whom we are not bound by the chain of friendship, O prince of the hills, the sides of which are covered by groves of tall sandal trees! though it seemeth day by day to increase, may be dissolved as instantaneously as 
the fire catcheth the straw. 

238. If I stretch not forth my hand and deliver my whole soul without hesitation to my friend, when he is in distress, may I be cast into the hell, where the wretch is punished who hath violated the chaste wife of his friend, and may I be scoffed at throughout the far-famed earth. 

244. Although the fruit of the plantain be ripened in the bitter leaves of the Vembu, it will not lose its natural sweetness; thus although they who are naturally good associate with the bad, their friendship for them will not corrupt their minds. 

245. Sweet water may be produced even on the side of the sea-shore and salt water on the side of a mountain. O Lord of the cool shore washed by the waves of the Ocean ! it is truly said that sensible men will not imitate those with whom they consort, but will preserve their own minds. 

246. O Lord of the cool shore of the Ocean, where the thick-boughed Punnei flourisheth! Will those, who are virtuous and impartial towards all, first contract and then dissolve friendship? than this it is better that friendship should never be contracted. 

247. To be united in friendship with the prudent, who think of that of which they ought to think, is productive of the highest felicity, and affliction is avoided by separating from fools who know not what belongeth to friendship. 

256. Those whose tongues are adorned by learning and knowledge (the wise) fear the disgrace of evil speaking; the unwise indulge therein: thus on the palm-tree the dry leaves maintain a perpetual rustling, while the green leaves make no noise. 

321. The moral precepts benevolently delivered by the kind-hearted, the wise receive to their benefit, but the ignorant, devoid of all good qualities, treat them with scorn; thus the ladle tasteth not the sweetness of the milk porridge it contains. 

335. If a fool, when angry with others without any cause for anger, like one who supposes he hath made an acquisition, without having in reality obtained anything, bewildered by passion, cannot crowd together abusive words, his tongue tingles all over. 

344. If the virtuous have received a favour as small as a grain of millet they will consider it as large as a palm-tree; but if a favour as large as a palm, O king of the Country washed by the sparkling waves! be conferred on the ungrateful, it will produce no benefit. 

346. The worthy, although they have attained to wealth and dominion, indulge not in haughty language, but if the mean have acquired the wealth of one Cani (1/80th part) added to one Mundire (1/320th) they will regard themselves as Indren, the king of heaven. 

353. O Lord of the country covered by mountains ! although it may be difficult to extol the good qualities of persons before their faces, of what are the tongues of those wretches made, who standing in their presence, declare their faults for the 
purpose of destroying their reputation ?

 356. The mountaineer thinks of his mountains, the husband-man of the cultivable land, the produce of which he gathers; the wise think of the special benefits they have received from others, and the fool keeps himself only in his own mind.

357. For one good turn they have received from another the wise will endure a hundred evils afterwards inflicted; but if they have received a hundred good turns and have suffered only one evil turn, fools will consider the hundred good turns as evils. 

362. Though women of light conversation (!) be as strictly guarded as the blade of a sword is care fully preserved (!); yet, if by any relaxation of vigilance, an opportunity be offered to them, little of this time will be occupied by deeds which are not evil, and much of it by them. 

363. The woman, who hold in opposition threateneth blows, is as death; 
She, who resorteth not to her kitchen betimes in the morning, is an incurable disease ; 
And she, who, having prepared food, grudgeth it to those who eat it, is a devil to domestic happiness; 
Women of these three descriptions are a destroying weapon to their husbands. 

370. When rightly perpended the water of the freshes and the love of women adorned with ear-rings differ not; for the water of the freshes will be dried up when the rain ceaseth, and so will their love when the income faileth. 

371. When rightly perpended the light of a lamp and the love of courtezans differ not; for the former is extinguished when the oil is dried up, and the latter estranged when the empty hand no longer contains money. 

373. Let them have been even as liberal as Shenganmal (sic) the goddess of prosperity, who is worshipped by the gods in the beauteous Heavens, courtezans whose hands are tinted like opening buds, will forsake those who have no wealth to bestow upon them, reverentially saluting them with folded hands. 

381. Although women are high in reputation and equal to the goddess Ayrani in conjugal fidelity, they must cautiously avoid those who are enamoured of them and follow them in hopes of gratifying their passions ! for such caution is the safe-guard of the virtue of matrons with perfumed foreheads. 

382. If in time of distress, when the meal of the whole family is cooked by the water of a small pot, a host of relations sufficient to consume the water of the sea should come at once, the softly speaking woman, who shews herself as bounteous as the 
ocean, is the glory of her house. 

383. Though her house be open on the four quarters, though it be exceedingly small, and though the rain pour in on every side, a chaste and virtuous woman will be renowned in the place in which she resideth and her habitation respected. 

384. She who is pleasing to the eye, who in all things gratifieth her husband according to his desire and at all times standeth in awe of him, whose modesty is so conspicuous as shame her sex, who reverenceth her husband, and in all her love- quarrels with him acteth with such prudence that reconciliation affordeth him increased delight; this mildly speaking matron is truly a woman. 

385. Whenever our husbands embrace our shoulders, we feel ashamed, as if we saw them for the first time; what pleasure then can those women enjoy, who, from the desire of money, endure daily the embraces of many men ? 

386.  Riches in the possession of a generous man resemble in their effects the learning acquired by a man of great natural ability ; the chastity of a modest woman is like a sharp sabre in the hands of a courageous man.    
---------------

 பாட்டு முதற்குறிப்பு அகரவரிசை 

 செய்யுள் -  எண் செய்யுள் எண்
அகத்தாரே வாழ்வார் என்  31	ஆள்பார்த் துழலும்20
அக்கேபோல் அங்கை123	ஆற்றுந் துணையும்196
அங்கண் விசும்பின் -அக 151	ஆன்படு நெய்பெய் 239
அங்கண் விசும்பின் -அம்  373	இசைந்த சிறுமை 187
அங்கோட் டகலல்குல்   372	இசையா ஒருபொருள்111
அச்சம் பெரிதால் 81	இசையா தெனினும் 194
அடுக்கல் மலைநாட 203	இசையும் எனினும் 152
அடைந்தார்ப் பிரிவும் 173	இடம்பட மெய்ஞ்ஞானம் 116
அத்திட்ட கூறை 281இடும்பைகூர் நெஞ்சத்தார் 107
அம்பல் அயல் எடுப்ப87	இட்டாற்றுப் பட்டொன் 288
அம்பும் அழலும்  89	இமைக்கும் அளவில்தம் 323
அரக்காம்பல் நாறும்வாய் 396	இம்மி அரிசித்94
அருகல தாகிப் 261	இம்மை பயக்குமால்132
அரும்பவிழ் தாரினான் 390	இம்மையும் நன்றாம் 294
அரும்பெறல் யாக்கையைப்34	இரவலர் கன்றாக 279
அரும்பெறற் கற்பின் 381	இருக்கை எழலும் 143
அருளின் அறமுறைக்கும்321	இரும்பார்க்குங் காலராய் 122
அலகுசால் கற்பின் 140	இலங்குநீர்த் தண்சேர்ப்ப 227
அவமதிப்பும் ஆன்ற 163	இல்லம் இளமை 53
அவ்வியம் இல்லார் 322	இல்லா இடத்தும் 91


அழல்மண்டு போழ்தின் 202 இல்லாமை கந்தா 303
அள்ளிக்கொள் வன்ன 262		இழித்தக்க செய்தொருவன்302
அறம்புகழ் கேண்மை82		இழைத்தநாள் எல்லை6
அறிமின் அறநெறி 172		இளையான் அடக்கம் 65
அறியாப் பருவத் 171			இறப்பச் சிறிதென்னா 99
அறியாரும் அல்லர் 108		இறப்ப நினையுங்கால் 174
அறிவ தறிந்தடங்கி 74			இறப்பவே தீய223
அறுசுவை உண்டி1		இற்சார்வின் ஏமாந்தோம்  182
ஆகா தெனினும்337		இற்பிறப்பில்லார் 320
ஆடுகோடாகி192			இற்பிறப் பெண்ணி 212
ஆணமில் நெஞ்சத்374			இனநன்மை இன்சொலொன்  146
ஆமாபோல் நக்கி377		இனியார்தம் நெஞ்சத்து369
ஆர்த்த அறிவினர்351		இன்பம் பயந்தாங்79
ஆர்த்த பொறிய290		இன்றாதும் இந்நிலையே359
ஆவாநாம் ஆக்கம்32		இன்றுகொல் அன்றுகொல்36
ஆவேறுரு வின்118		இன்னர் இனையர்205
இன்னா இயைக   306		எய்தியிருந்த   325
இன்னா செயினும் - இனி76		எறிநீர்ப் பெருங்கடல்  275
இன்னா செயினும் - விட225		எறியென் றெதிர்நிற்பாள்  363
இன்னா செயினும் - விடு226		எற்றொன்றும் இல்லா  150


ஈட்டலும் துன்பமற் 280	எனக்குத்தா யாகியாள்  15
ஈண்டுநீர் வையத்துள்109	எனதென தென்றிருக்கும்  276
ஈத லிசையா181	என்பாய் உகினும்  292
ஈனமாய் இல்லிருந்198	என்றும் புதியார்  307
உடாஅதும் உண்ணாதும்10	என்னானும் ஒன்றுதம்5
உடுக்கை உலறி 141	என்னேமற் றிவ்வுடம்பு330
உடைப்பெருஞ் செல்வரும்  368	ஏட்டைப் பருவத்தும்  358
உடையார் இவர்என்  160	ஏதிலார் செய்த 228
உணர உணரும்  247	ஏமாந்த போழ்தின்  378
உண்டாய போழ்தின்  284	ஏற்றகை மாற்றாமை 98
உண்ணான் ஒளிநிறான் 9	ஒண்கதிர் வாள்மதியம்176
 உபகாரம் செய்ததனை  69	ஒருநன்றி செய்தவர்க்  357
உயிர்போயார் வெண்டலை 50	ஒருநீர்ப் பிறந்தோருங்கு  236
உருவிற் கமைந்தான்கண்  240	ஒருபுடை பாம்பு  148
உருவும் இளமையும்  102	ஒருவ ரொருவரைச்  309
உலகறியத் தீரக்  204	ஓக்கிய ஒள்வாள்தன்  129
உளநாள் சிலவால்  324	ஓதியும் ஓதார்  270
உள்கூர் பசியால்  286 	ஓலைக் கணக்கர்  397
உள்ளத்தான் நள்ளா  128	கடகம் செறிந்ததங்  289
உள்ளத் துணர்வுடையான்  386	கடக்கருங் கானத்துக்  398


உள்ளம் ஒருவன்  380	கடமா தொலைச்சிய  300
உறக்கும் துணையதோர்  38	கடல்சார்ந்தும் இன்னீர்  245
உறற்பால நீக்கல் 104	கடித்துக் கரும்பினைக்  156
உறுபுலி ஊனிரை 193	கடிப்பிடு கண்முரசம்  100
உறுபுனல் தந்துல 185	கடியெனக் கேட்டுங்  364
உறைப்பருங் காலத்தும் 184	கடுக்கி ஒருவன் 189
ஊக்கித்தாம் கொண்ட  57	கடுக்கெனச் சொல்வற்றாம்  348
ஊரங் கணநீர்   175	கடையாயார் நட்பிற்  216
ஊருள் எழுந்த 90	கடையெலாம் காய்பசி  297
ஊறி உவர்த்தக்க 47	கட்கினியாள் காதலன்   384
ஊறுசெய் நெஞ்சம்தம்  379	கணமலை நன்னாட 353
எஞ்ஞான்றும் எம்கணவர்  385	கணம் கொண்டு சுற்றத்தார்  25
எத்துணை யானும்   272	கண்கயல் என்னுங்  395
எந்நிலத்து வித்திடினும்  243	கண்மூன் றுடையானும்  400
எம்மை அறிந்திலிர்  165	கப்பி கடவதாக் 341
கம்மஞ்செய் மாக்கள்  393	கொடுத்தலும் துய்த்தலும்  274
கரவாத திண்ணன்பின்  305	கொய்புல் கொடுத்துக்  350
கருங்கொள்ளும் செங்  387	கொலைஞர் உலையேற்றித்   331
கருத்துணர்ந்து கற்றறிந்தார்  211	 கொல்லை யிரும்புனத்துக் 178
கருமமும் உட்படாப் 250	கொன்னே கழிந்தன்  55


கரும வரிசையாற்  249	கோடேந் தகவல்குற் 354
கரும்பாட்டிக் கட்டி 35	கோட்டுப்பூப்போல  215
கல்எறிந் தன்ன  66	கோதை யருவிக்  71
கல்நனி நல்ல  334	கோளாற்றக் கொள்ளாக்   191
கல்லாக் கழிப்பர்   366	சக்கரச் செல்வம்  346
கல்லாது நீண்ட 254	சாய்ப்பறிக்க நீர்திகழுந்  389
கல்லாது போகிய  169	சான்றாண்மை சாயல்  142
கல்லாமை அச்சம்  145	சான்றோர் எனமதித்துச்  126
கல்லாரே யாயினும்  139	சிதலை தினப்பட்ட 197
கல்லென்று தந்தை  253	சிறுகா பெருகா 110
கல்லோங் குயர்வரைமேற்  283	சிறுகாலை யேதமக்குச்  328
கல்வி கரையில 135	சரியார் கேண்மை  232
கழிந்தார் இடுதலை  49	செந்நெல்லா லாய 367
கழிநீருட் காரட்  217செம்மையொன் றின்றிச் 85
களர்நிலத் துப்பிறந்த  133	செய்கை யழிந்து 147
கள்ளார்கள் உண்ணார் 157	செய்யாத செய்தும்நாம்  235
கற்றதூஉ மின்றிக்  314செல்சுடர் நோக்கிச்  394
கற்றறிந்த நாவினார்   256	செல்லா இடத்தும்  149
கற்றனவும் கண்ணகன்ற  340	செல்வர்யாம் என்றுதாம்  8
கற்றார் உரைக்குங்  260	செல்வுழிக் கண்ஒருநாள்154



 கனைகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப  138	செழும்பெரும் பொய்கை 352
காணின் குடிப்பழியாம்  84செறிப்பில் பழங்கூரை  231
காதலார் சொல்லுங் 73	செறுத்தோ றுடைப்  222
காலாடு போழ்தில்  113	சென்றே எறிப 24
காவா தொருவன்தன் 63	சொல்தளர்ந்து கோல்  13
காழாய கொண்டு   342	சொற்றாற்றுக் கொண்டு  313
குஞ்சி யழகும்  131	தக்காரும் தக்கவர்   112
குடநீர்அட் டுண்ணும்  382	தக்கோலம் தின்று  43
குடரும் கொழுவும்  46	தங்கண் மரபில்லார் 336
குலம்தவம் கல்வி   333	தண்டாச் சிறப்பின் தம்   62
குற்றமும் ஏனைக்  230	தமரென்று தாங்கொள்ளப்    229
கூர்த்துநாய் கௌவிக் 70	தம்அமர் காதலர்  392
கேளாதே வந்து 30	தம்மை இகழ்ந்தமை   58
கொடியவை கூறாதி  388	தம்மை இகழ்வாரைத்  117
தலையே தவம் முயன்று  365	நல்லார் நயவ 265
தவலருந் தொல்கேள்வித்  137	நளிகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப - நல்  242
தளிர்மேலே நிற்பினும்  355	நளிகடல் தண்சேர்ப்ப - நாள்  166
தனதாகத் தான்கொடான்  278	நறுமலர் தண்கோதாய்த்   209
தாமேயும் இன்புறார்  327	நன்னிலைக்கண் தன்னை  248
தாம் செய்வினையல்லால்  120	நாப்பாடம் சொல்லி  312


 தாழாத் தளராத் 14	நாய்க்காற் சிறுவிரல்போல்  218
தான்கெடினும் தக்கார்கே  80	நார்த்தொடுத் தீர்க்கிலென்  26
திருத்தன்னை நீப்பினும்  304	நாலாறும் ஆறாய்  383
திருமதுகை யாகத்  291	நாள்வாய்ப் பெறினுந்தந்   207
தினைத்துணைய ராகித்தம்  105	நாறாத் தகடேபோல்  266
தினையனைத்தே யாயினும்  344	நிலநலத்தால் நந்திய 179
தீங்கரும் பீன்ற  199	நிலையாமை நோய்மூப்புச்  52
துகள்தீர் பெருஞ்செல்வம்   2	நின்றன நின்றன   4
துக்கத்துள் தூங்கி   121	நீரினும் நுண்ணிது  282
துய்த்துக் கழியான் 273	நீருட் பிறந்து 360
துன்பமே மீதூரக 60	நீர்மையே யன்றி    287
துன்பம் பலநாள் 54	நுண்ணுணர்வி னாரொடு   233
தெண்ணீர்க் குவளை 44	நுண்ணுணர் வின்மை   251
தெரியத் தெரியுந்  168	நெடுங்காலம் ஓடினும்  68
தெளிவிலார் நட்பிற் 219	நெருப்பழல் சேர்ந்தக்கால்   124
தோணி இயக்குவான்  136	நேரல்லார் நீரல்ல  72
தோற்போர்வை மேலும்  42	நேர்த்து நிகரல்லார்  64
தோற்றம்சால் ஞாயிறு  7	பகைவர் பணிவிடம்   241
நச்சியார்க் கியாமை   299	படுமழை மொக்குளில்   27
நடுக்குற்றுத் தற்சேர்ந்தார்  93	பண்டம் அறியார்  48
நடுவூருள் வேதிகை  96	பரவா வெளிப்படா  88


நட்டார்க்கும் நள்ளா  271		பராஅரைப் புன்னை  246
நட்புநார் அற்றன 12		பருவம் எனைத்துள்  18
நம்மாலே யாவர்இந்  301		பலநாளும் பக்கத்தா  214
நயவார்கண் நல்குரவு  267		பல்லார் அறியப்  86
நரம்பெழுந்து நல்கூர்ந்தா  153		பல்லாவுள் உய்த்து   101
நரைவரும் என்றெண்ணி  11		பல்லான்ற கேள்விப் - பாட  252
நல்ஆவின் கன்றாயின்   115		பல்லான்ற கேள்விப் - வீய  106
நல்ல குலமென்றும் 195		பழமைகந் தாகப்  310
நல்லர் பெரிதளியர்  298		பழைய ரிவரென்று   349
நல்லவை செய்யின்  144		பனிபடு சோலைப்  17
நல்லவை நாடொறும்  338		பன்றிக்கூழ்ப் பத்தரில்  257
நல்லார் எனத்தாம்  221		பன்னாளும் சென்றக்கால்  159
பாடமே ஓதிப்  316		மலைமிசைத் தோன்றும்  21
பாம்பிற் கொருதலை 375		மல்கு திரைய  263
பாலாற் கழீஇப்  258		மல்லன்மா ஞாலத்து    296
பாலோ டளாயநீர்   177		மழைதிளைக்கும் மாடமாய்  361
பாவமும் ஏனைப்  295		மறுமைக்கு வித்து 183
பிறந்த குலம்மாயும்  285		மறுமையும் இம்மையும் 95
பிறர்மறை யின்கண  158		மற்றறிவாம் நல்வினை 19
புக்க விடத்தச்சம் 83		மனத்தான் மறுவில் 180


புணர்கடல்சூழ் வையத்துப்  264	மனைப்பாசம் கைவிடாய் 130
புதுப்புனலும் பூங்குழையார் 370		மன்றம் கறங்க 23
புத்தகமே சாலத்  318		மன்னர் திருவும் 167
புல்நுனிமேல் நீர்போல்  29		மாக்கேழ் மடநல்லாய் 41
புல்லா எழுத்தின்  155		மாண்ட குணத்தோடு 56
புல்லாப்புன் கோட்டிப்  255		மாற்றாராய் நின்றுதம் 67>
புறத்துத்தான் இன்மை  308		மான அருங்கலம் 40
பெயற்பால் மழைபெய்யாக்   97		முட்டிகை போல 208
பெரியவர் கேண்மை  125		முட்டுற்ற போழ்தின்  238
பெரியார் பெருநட்புக் 77		முயங்காக்கால் பாயும் 391
பெரியார் பெருமை  170		முலைக்கண்ணும் முத்தும்  399
பெருகுவது போலத் 234		முல்லை முகைமுறுவல்   45
பெருங்கடலாடிய  332		முற்றற் சிறுமந்தி 237
பெருநடை தாம்பெறினும்  343		முற்றுற்றுந் துற்றினை 190
பெருமுத் தரையர் 200		முன்னரே சாநாள் 92
பெருவரை நாட 186		மூப்புமேல் வாராமை  326
பெறுவது கொள்பவர்  317		மெய்ஞ்ஞானக் கோட்டி  311
பெறுவதொன் றின்றியும்  335		மெய்வாய்கண் மூக்குச் 59
பொத்தநூற் கல்லும்  376		மெல்லிய நல்லாருள் 188
பொழிந்தினிது நாறினும்  259		மைதீர் பசும்பொன்மேல்  347
பொழிப்பகலம் நுட்ப நூல்  319		யாஅர் உலகத்தோர் 119


பொறுப்பரென் றெண்ணிப்  161	யாஅர் ஒருவர் 127
பொற்கலத்துப் பெய்த  206	யாக்கையை யாப்புடைத்தாப்  28
 பொற்கலத் தூட்டிப்   345	யாமாயின் எம்இல்லம்  293
பொன்னிறச் செந்நெற்   269	யானை அனையவர் 213
பொன்னே கொடுத்தும்  162	யானை யெருத்தம்   3
மக்களா லாய   37	வடுவிலா வையத்து  114
மடிதிரை தந்திட்ட  224	வயாவும் வருத்தமும் 201
மதித்திறப் பாரும்   61	வலவைக ளல்லாதார் 268
மரீஇப் பலரோடு  220	வழங்காத செல்வரின்  277
மலைநலம் உள்ளும்  356	வழுக்கெனைத்தும் இல்லாத  362
வளம்பட வேண்டாதார் 103	வினைப்பயன் வந்தக்கால்  33
வற்றிமற் றாற்றப்  78	வெறிஅயர் வெங்களத்து  16
வாழ்நாட் கலகா 22	வெறுமை யிடத்தும்  329
வான்ஒடு வில்லின் 0	வென்றிப் பொருட்டால் 315
விரிநிற நாகம்   164	வேம்பின் இலையுட்  244
விருப்பிலா ரில்லத்து 210	வேற்றுமை யின்றிக்  75
விழைந்தொருவர் தம்மை  339வைகலும் வைகல் 39
விளக்குப் புகஇருள் 51	வைப்புழிக் கோட்பாடா 134
விளக்கொளியும் வேசையர்  371

 பாட்டு முதற்குறிப்பு அகரவரிசை முற்றும். 



GLOSSARY 
அஆ - alas! 
அஃகு - diminish. 
அகடு - centre. 
அகத்தார் - those within. 
அகத்து – inwardly. 
அகலம் - chest, breast of a man. 
அகழ் - dig. 
அக்காரம் - sugar. 
அக்கு - armlets of conch-shell. 
அங்கணம் - a gutter, drain. 
அசா - feebleness. 
அசை - be unsteady, waver. 
அச்சம் - dread; guilty fear. 
அச்சு - axle. 
அஞ்சுதல் - fearing, dreading; shrinking from. 
அஞ்ஞானம் - unwisdom, folly. 
அடக்கம் - self-restraint; modesty.
அடக்கு - restrain; hide, bury. 
அடகு - greens, vegetables. 
அடங்கு - lean self-restraint ; subside, sink down ; cease. 
அடம்பம்பூ - a kind of creeper. 
அடு - cook; kill. 
அடுத்தடுத்து - with increasing vehemence. 
அடுப்பு - hearth. 
அடை -draw near; take shelter; attain unto; be closed. 
அட்டில் - cook-house. 
அணங்கு - affliction. 
அணி - beautiful, nearness. 
அணியகலம் - beautiful chest. 
அணியர் - those who are near. 
அணை - a dam; a pillow, mattress ; tie. 
அண் - (as a formative) place. 
அண்ணா - lift up the head to look. 
அதர் - path, public road. 
அத்து - a red dye. 
அந்தோ - alas! 
அபகாரம் - injury. 
அபராணம் - afternoon. 
அமரர் - immortals, gods. 
அமர் - fondly love. 
அமிழ்து - ambrosia. 
அமைந்த - thorough, full; fitness, things agreeable to; possessing in full measure. 
அமைவு - fitness. 
அம் - beautiful. 
அம்பல் - scandal, evil report. 
அம்பு - arrow. 
அம்ம - an expletive; probably a voc. of அம்மை. 
அம்மருங்கு - beautiful hip. 
அம்மனை - mother. 
அம்மா - a stronger form of அம்ம: a particle indicating surprise or emotion : 'Ah, do so!' 
அயர் - perform. 
அயலார் - neighbours. 
அயிராணி, (ஐயிராணி) - wife of Indra. 
அயில் - keenness; keen-edged. 
அரக்கு - red; gum-lac. 
அரண் - stronghold. 
அரற்று - cry; reiterate foolishly ; reverberate.
அரா - serpents. 
அரி(மா) - lion. 
அரிசி - rice unboiled. 
அரிது - hard, rarely or never. 
அருகலது - being without diminution.
அருகு - neighborhood; draw near.
அருங்கலம் - precious ornaments. 
அருத்தம் - wealth. 
அருமை - impossible; impregnable. 
அரும் - hard to obtain, bear up against etc. 
அரும்பு - a flower-bud. 
அருவி - a water-fall. 
அருளு - regard with favour. 
அருள் - grace, favour, benevolence. 
அரோ- a mere expletive. 
அலகு - computation. 
அலகுசாற்கற்பு -infinite learning. 
அலரி  - flower. 
அலவன் - crab. 
அலறு - lament aloud. 
அலி - hermaphrodite. 
அலை - wave; cause to wave, agitate. 
அல், அன்மை - not being.
அல்கு- grow less. 
அல்லல் - suffering, privation; want; poverty. 
அவா - intense desire. 
அவாத்தக்க - such as eyes covet.
அவாவு - desire, covet.
அவி - soften, abate, become  extinguished. 
அவிர் - glisten. 
அவிழ் - loosen; expand. 
அவை- assembly. 
அவ்வியம் - envy. 
அழல் - fire, heat. 
அழி - perish, go to ruin; destroy; waste away; loose; fall into despair.
அழு - weep aloud. 
அழுகு - rot away.
அழுங்கு - sink down; be injured, be sullied; be destroyed. 
அழுத்து - set in; inlay (jewels in gold). 
அளவு - a measure. 
அளாவு - mingle. 
அளி- tenderness, kindness, gentle-minded.
அள்ளு - take by handfuls. 
அறத்தாறு - the path of virtue. 
அறத்துப்பால் -the part which treats of virtue.
அறம், அறன் - virtue; charity; justice.
அறி - know. 
அறு - sever, cut off ; fail. 
அறை - sound; strike. 
அற்புத்தளை (அன்புத்தளை) - bond of love. 
அற்றம் (=வறுமை) - destitution, poverty.
அனைத்து - so much as, such like. 
அனையம் - we are as. 
அனையவும்- all. 
அன்றில் - a fabulous bird which is said never to survive its mate
அன்று - it is not. 
அன்னம் - a kind of swan. 
அன்னோ - an interjection: alas! 
ஆ, ஆன் - cow. 
ஆஅயக்கால் - when it is. 
ஆகா - will not become, will not befit. 
ஆகுவர் - they will flourish. 
ஆக்கம்  - increase; wealth. 
ஆக்கு - make, cause; kindle. 
ஆங்கு  -there; then; just so; so; as.
ஆடு - swing, oscillate; play, dance; move briskly; bathe. 
ஆட்சி -  the use, mastery, practice; exercise of anything. 
ஆட்டு - grind in a mill. 
ஆணம் - love. 
ஆண் - male ; masculine character.
ஆண்டைக் கதவு- the gate of paradise. 
ஆதுநாம் - we shall prosper. 
ஆமை - turtle, tortoise. 
ஆம்பல் - the red and white water-lily. 
ஆயிரவர் - thousands of persons. 
ஆயிழை - an exquisite jewel. 
ஆயின் - if it be [Neg.  இல்லாயின்].
ஆய் - a mother; investigate; seek out; cull; care for.
ஆர - fully; our fill. 
ஆர்- become full; feed full; sound; resound; hum; bind; ripe. 
ஆலம் , ஆல் - a banyan tree, Ficus Indica. 
ஆவது -it will serve; resulting benefit. 
ஆவாம் -(we) shall prosper. 
ஆழ் - deep; sink. 
ஆளன் - he who possesses or exercises. 
ஆல் - a person; a slave; rule; use. 
ஆறு - a river ; a direction ; grow cool ; become mitigated or healed. 
ஆற்ற - much. 
ஆற்றல் - power (of action and endurance). 
ஆற்றாதார் - the poor and helpless; those who are unable to do anything in return. 
ஆற்றாமை - weakness; an in tolerable injury 
ஆன்ற - widely diffused. 
இஃது - this. 
இக - leave behind; pass over, transcend. 
இகல் - jealous rivalry. 
இகழ் - despise. 
இசை - fame; agree; fall to the lot of; be possible, succeed; be innate; sound out. 
இடம், இடன் - place; left side; where and when. 
இடம்பட - extensively. 
இடர் - affliction: pinch of poverty. 
இடி - thunder, send forth bolts ; crush, pound in a mortar. 
இடு - give, put. 
இடுக்கண் - want, straitened circumstances. 
இடும்பை- want, poverty; annoyance.
இருமை - the two states: this. world and the next. 

இடை (நடு) - middle (course; sort of people).
இடைதிரி - change; deteriorate
இடைதெரிந்து  - knowing (it) through and through.
இடைமிடை - commingle. 
இடையிடையே - everywhere between 
இட்டாறு - straitened circumstances.  
இமை - wink, close the eyes; shine, twinkle as jewels.
இமி - a very small fraction: 1/1,075,200; an atom.
இம்மியரிசி - a small seed of a wild grass. 
இம்மென - 'with pattering sound' =so as to say. 
இம்மை - state in this world. 
இயக்கு, இயங்கு - move (tr. &. int.) 
இயலு - be possible; be composed of. 
இயல் - nature. 
இயல்பு - nature; goodness.
இயை (= இசை ) - be practicable ; combine ; adhere to.
இறு- come to an end, die; be broken. 
இர - beg, ask. 
இரட்டி- twice as much. 
இரவலர் - mendicants. 
இரவு - mendicity. 
இரி -  be driven away, take to flight. 
இரிந்தைக்க (=ஒழிக) - "be it put away! 
இரு - two; great; sit; remain, be; an auxiliary. 
இருந்தை - charcoal. 
இருமை - the two states; this world and the next.
இரை -food, fodder, provender of animals, prey. 
இலக்கணம்  - sign. 
இலங்கு - glisten, shimmer. 
இலர், இலார் - those without. 
இல் -  house; wife ; family ; domestic enjoyment; root, used absolutely in predication.[ Opp. உண்டு ].
இழ - lose ; sacrifice. 
இழி  - suffer degradation ; degrade. 
இழுக்கு - a fault, failure [Opp. ஒழுக்கு] ; slip. 
இழை - (meto.) jewel; jewelled lady; determine; plan; hasten on. 
இளம், இளை- tender, young. 
இளம்பிறை - the young (crescent) moon.
இளி - disgrace [Opp. ஒளி]. 
இளையம்- 'we are young.' 
இளையான் - a youth. 
இற - pass on, by, away ; die [Opp. பிற]; surpass. 
இறு - come to an end, die; be broken.
இறை - draw near and pour out.
இறைஞ்சு - bow before. 
இற்று- of this kind; thus. 
இற்றுழி (இற்றவுழி) - when it is broken.
இனம் - race, kind, family, genus. 
இனிய  - sweet, pleasant. 
இனையர் - such, of such account; so many. 
இன்பம், இன்பு - pleasure. 
இன்மை (இல் +மை)  - absence of; poverty, destitution.
இன்றி - destitute. 
இன்று - is not; today. 
இன்ன(ர்) - such like (person).
இன்னா - bitter; evil. 
இன்னாங்கு - trouble. 
இன்னாமை- affliction. 
இன்னினியே - this very instant. 
இன்னே - even now. 
ஈ - a fly; give. 
ஈங்கு - here.
ஈட்டு - collect, store up, hoard. 
ஈண்டு - here, in this world; grow; accumulate; abound.
ஈதல் - a bestowing in charity. 
ஈரம் - moisture; by meto, coolness, pleasantness; favour; affection. 
ஈர் - two; drag 
ஈனம் (= இன்மை) - absence of, lack of. 
ஈன்  - bear, produce. 
உகிர்- nail (of finger or toe), claw, talon; finger, toe.
உகு - fall down, be shed, pour down. 
உசா(வு) - kindly sympathizing enquiry. 
உஞற்று - use effort.
உடங்கு -  together with, altogether. 
உடம்பு - body. 
உடன் - a particle expressing co-existence; used as a post position.
உடு -put on, wear. 
உடுக்கை - garment. 
உடை - possessions, wealth ; break, burst, become broken, perish.
உட்கு - dread; reverence. 
உணக்கு - make dry. 
உணர் - understand, feel the truth, appreciate. 
உண், உண்ணு - eat; drink; suck, imbibe; enjoy. 
உண்டி - food. 
உண்டு (உளது ) - it is. 
உதவு - serve a purpose; help; be of use. 
உதிர் - fall off; fall to the ground. 
உபகாரம் - benefit. 
உபாயம் - stratagem, prudence. 
உப்பிலி - insipid. 
உப்பு - salt. 
உமி - husk. 
உம்பர் -the upper celestial world.
உம்மை -the other, some other world or states. 
உயங்கு - afflict; suffer. 
உயர்த்து - exalt. 
உயல், உய்தல் - escaping. 
உயிர் - life; being; sigh, breathe, waft. 
உய் - escape; cause to go together; collect; direct, carry forth.
உரம், உரன் - strength. 
உரவு நீர் - the rushing torrent. 
உராய் - rub against 
உரிமை - possession. 
உரு - form; beauty; much, great, vigorous. 
உருமு - a thunderbolt. 
உருவு - form. 
உரை - an explanation, commentary ; speak, say, tell; explain. 
 [Syn. சொல், கூறு, அறை].
உல - dry up; fail ; perish.
உலகம் - world. 
உலறு - be worn out. 
உலை - a forge; boiler; cooking pot. 
உவ - be glad. 
உவரி - the salt sea ; brackish water. 
உவர் - brackishness, saltness; disgust; loathe.
உழ - suffer. 
உழல் - wander about. 
உழவர், உழவன் - cultivator. 
உழவு -ploughing, cultivation. 
உழு- plough. 
உழை - place, refuge. 
உள, உள்ள - they are, that are, that which are. 
உளம், உள்ளம் - mind, thought; breast. 
உளர் - persons existing. 
உளி - a chisel. 
உளை - tufted flowers. 
உள் - place; inside, mind; exist.
உள்ளு - think.
உற - firmly, fastly. 
உறங்கு - sleep 
உறல் - the befalling. 
உறழ் - suit, fit, appertain to. 
உறின் - if it be befalling. 
உறு - become; befall; befit, hap. [Opp. அறு, இறு]; real; mighty. 
உறுதி - stability, strength, certainty. 
உறுத்து - cause to hap. 
உறுப்பு - member. 
உறுவர் - ascetics. 
உறை - rain; burn; be pungent or rank; cause smart; reek of.
உறைப்பு - pungency, a copious penetrating rain.
உற்றவர் -those who in sorrow seek their aid. 
ஊக்கம் -  strength, power; aim, plan;  effort. 
ஊக்கல் - acting vigorously. 
ஊடு - sulk, get impatient or angry with.
ஊட்டு- feed, supply with food; dye.
ஊதியம்- profit, utility. 
ஊரன்- head-man. 
ஊராண்மை - magnanimity, munificence.
ஊர் -town: cause to go, drive, ride on, crawl; circulate as sap.
ஊழி - an aeon, age; eternity. 
ஊழ்- what is in regular sequence, one after the other.
ஊறு - affliction; ooze out, flow.
ஊற்று - spring of water; support. 
ஊன் - flesh. 
ஊன்று- support on. 
எஃகு - keenness; steel ; javelin. 
எக்காலும் - always, ever. 
எச்சம் - What is left over or behind; what supplies a deficiency, complement.
எச்சில் - refuse of food, leavings; anything unclean.
எஞ்சு -survive, escape; remain over. 
எஞ்ஞான்றும் - always. 
எடு - acquire, gain a name, raise, lift up; support.
எதிர் - what is opposite to. 
எம் - our. 
எம்மை - us; what world or state or birth. 
எயிறு - tooth. 
எய் - send forth, emit; obtain; possess; assemble. 
எரி - fire; consume. 
எருத்தம் - the nape of the neck. 
எருத்து - bend the neck as suppliants.  
எருவை - a kind of reed. 
எல் - night. 
எல்லை - bound, limit. 
எவ்வம் - pain, affliction. 
எழிலி - a cloud. 
எழில்- beauty, youthful grace, youth. 
எழு - seven; rise up, rise and wander forth; stand out.
எழுத்து - a writing. 
எளிய - easy. 
எள்ளு- despise, think lightly of. 
எறி - strike; hurl, throw up. 
ஏற்று (என் +து)  - It is of what sort? 
எனின் - if. 
எனைத்து - how much, how many ? 
என்- me, my ; interrogative pron. 'what'; say. 
என்பு - bone. 
என்று - what day? 
என்றும் - always, continually. 
என்னை - me; it is what? 
ஏகு  - go. 
ஏங்கு - pine. 
ஏட்டை - poverty. 
ஏதிலார் - strangers, foes, neighbours. 
ஏதிலார் - strangeness; vicinity. 
ஏமம் - safety, protection ; intense delight. 
ஏமுறுதல் - sensual bewilderment.  
ஏத்து - extol, praise. 
ஏந்து - be raised, elevated. 
ஏலாமை - impossibility, incongruity, declining a challenge.
ஏல் - if; be fitting ; accept; ask alms; meet in battle.
ஏழை - an ignorant wretch. 
ஏறு - rise, ascend, climb. 
ஏற்று- lift up, put up into. 
ஏனை - other; how many; contrary to.
ஐ, ஐந்து- five. 
ஐந்தை - small mustard seed. 
ஐயம் - alms. 
ஐயன் - father. 
ஒ- be likewise. 
ஒக்கும் - it will be equal, like.
ஒட்டு - cling to, unite [Opp. ஒருவு]
ஒண், ஒட், ஒள் - bright; good; beautiful ; wise. 
ஒதுங்கு - retire; recede. 
ஒப்பு - agree; be equal. 


ஒப்புரவு - befitting conduct.   
ஒரு, ஒன்று - a, one, any. 
ஒருங்கு - altogether, at once, completely. 
ஒருவர், ஒருவன் - (any) person. 
ஒருவு - shun; transcend; 
ஒலி - sound; roar, resound.  
ஒல் - be possible. 
ஒல்கு - be shaken, fail. 
ஒல்லை - promptitude; swiftly. 
ஒழி - leave ; shun; forsake ;depart; cease.   
ஒழுகு - flow on; pass; act; behave. 
ஒழுக்கம் - decorum, virtue. 
ஒளி - glory ; splendour, light; hide. 
ஒள் - bright; good; beautiful; wise. 
ஒறு - punish. 
ஒற்கம் - feebleness.  
ஒன்று - any (thing); suit, fit; join. 
ஒன்னார் - enemies. 
ஒஓ -interrogation: Ah! Oho! 
ஓங்கு - rise above. 
ஓசை, ஓலம் - sound. 
ஓடு - earthern pot; run on.
ஓட்டு - cause to run ; pass; spend.
ஓதம் - billow, surf wave; ocean. 
ஓது - study. 
ஓம்பு - cherish. 
ஓர் - one; search out, ponder. 
ஓவு - cease. 
கசடு - bitterness, disgust.
கட - cross over, pass.
கடகம், கடையம் - a bracelet.
கடப்பாடு - obligation; order. 
கடலம், கடல் - sea. 
கடவது - what is due, as much as is needful. 
கடன் - obligation, duty; debt. 
கடி - marriage; rebuke; renounce; scare away, over power and dispel.
கடிஞை - a beggar's bowl. 
கடிப்பு - a drumstick. 
கடு - intense; evil; poison.
கடுகு - make haste. 
கடுக்கு - enrage. 

கடும் - harsh: fierce; [Opp. இன்] 
கடை - shop or bazaar; last or lowest in state. 
கடைப்பிடி - keep in mind. 
கட்டி - inspissated juice, lump of sugar. 
கட்டே - dwells on. 
கணக்காயர் - teachers of the Vedas.
கணமலை - a knot of hills. 
கணம் - (in) troops. 
கணு - a joint or knot  or eye in tree.
கண் - eye. 
கண்ணோடு - be graciously disposed towards.
கண்படு - slumber.
கதம் - wrath. 
கதிர் - ray. 
கதுப்பு - a woman's hair. 
கப்பி - grain; coarse grits. 
கமழ் - be diffused as odours. 
கமுகு - the Betelnut palm. 
கம்மம் - smith’s work.
கயம் - a low or base man; depth.
கயல் - any fish; a special fish. 
கர - conceal, refuse. 
கரி - evidence, example. 
கரு - black; eminence. 
கருது - regard. 
கருமம், கர்மம் - affair, business, 
கரும்பார்க் கழனி - hell. 
கருவி - instrument. 
கருனை - anything fried. 
கரை - a shore, bank. 
கல - mingle with, be intimate with 
கலங்கு - be confounded, perturbed. 
கலம், கலன் - a vessel, ship; 
கலி - cry.
கலுழ் - wail. 
கலை - a stag. 
கல் - stone, rock; learn; excavate; bury. 
கல்வி - learning. 
கவறு - a forked piece of palmyra wood, a fulcrum. 
கவற்று - cause trouble to;  distract. 
கவான் - lap, thigh. 
கவி - overarch; cover as a canopy. 
கவ்வு - seize with open jaws. 
கழல் - fall or slip out. 
கழறு - urge. 
கழனி  - a cultivated field. 
கழி - back-water, creek; much; pass off; spend time.   
கழுகு - vulture. 
களர் - brackish soil. 
களிறு - elephant. 
களை - remove, cut off. 
கள் - toddy; honey: steal; act  treacherously. 
கறங்கு - sound. 
கறி - bite; eat. 
கறு - grow dark (with anger). 
கறை - darkness. 
கற்பு - chastity; learning. 
கனம் - weight; value. 
கனல் - fire. 
கனி  - ripe, sweet fruit; ripen. 
கனை - sound; roar. 
கன்று - calf.
கன்னி(யர்) - virgin(s). 
கா - guard; hoard; restrain. 
காக்கை - crow. 
காடு - a jungle ; burning ground. 
காட்சி - the vision and the faculty divine. 
காணம் - wealth, gold, coin. 
காண் - see. 
காதம் - an Indian league, about 5 English miles.
காதல் - affection; desire. 
காமம் - love; desire ; lust, sexual passion.
காயம் - condiment, seasoning, hot spice. 
கார் - blackness; a cloud: be acrid. 
காலாடு - be active. 
காலு - discharge; vomit. 
காழ் - hardness; core; kernel; ripe and solid wisdom.
காளை - a young bullock; a youth; a bridegroom.
கான(க)ம், கான் - a desert. 
கானல் - a grove on the seashore.  
கிட - lie down, remain, lie still. 
கிடை - a kind of cork wood. 
கிழமை - familiar friendship; propriety. 
கிழி - tear; rend, pierce. 
கிளை - branch; kindred grow, be amplified. 
கிள்ளு, கிள் - pinch; dig out. 
கீழ் - under, sign of 7th case; by metonymy: low man. 
குடி - family, noble family.  
குடை - umbrella ; bend; hollow out. 
குணம், குணன் - quality; excellence. 
குணுங்கர் - low people. 
குண்டு - depth.
குண்டை - bullock. 
குதலைமை - folly. 
குத்தி, குற்றி - a log; having snatched. 
குத்து - peck, pierce, prick. 
குப்புறு - rush away (fall head long.) 
கும்பி - hell. 
குய் - spice, seasoning. 
குரம்பு - bank, limit. 
குருகு - a bird. 
குலம் - family; race; caste. 
குவளை - water-lily. 
குழம்பு - mud, slime. 
குழவி - early youth. 
குழுவு - unite, associate. 
குழை - ear jewel; tender leaves; wag, bend. 
குறடு - pincers, tongs. 
குறு - small. 
குறுகு - approach. 
குறை - grow less; cut short; trim. 
குன்று - diminish. 
கூத்தியர் - dancing girls. 
கூம்பு - close as flowers. 
கூர் - sharp; point. 
கூழ் - grain, rice; food. 
கூறு - say, declare, proclaim. 
கூறை - garment. 
கூற்று - death, Yaman. 
கெடு - perish, disappear. 
கெழு - become familiar, accustomed to. 
கேணி - a temporary well; hole in the sand. 
கேழ் - hue. 
கேள் - kindred. 
கேள்வி - traditional lore. 
கையுறு - come to hand. 
கைஞ்ஞானம் - trifling, unreal wisdom.
கைத்து - what is in hand: means, property.
கைப்பு - bitterness. 
கொடு - cruel, evil; give. 
கொட்டு - strike, beat a drum, gently manipulate. 
கொண்மூ - cloud. 
கொம்பு - the bough of a tree. 
கொம்மை - roundity. 
கொய் - pluck. 
கொல் - kill; an expletive emphasizing a statement or a question
கொல்லன் - a smith. 
கொழி - sift, examine. 
கொழுவு - fat. 
கொள் - take hold of, receive; seize; marry; hold in estimation
கொள்கை - tenet, principle. 
கொள்ளு - horse-gram black and red. 
கொன் - hell; vain, useless. 
கோ - king; string together. 
கோங்கு - silk-cotton tree 
கோடு - flexure, plait, fold; a branch; border; a curved tusk; bend, diverge from  right. 
கோது - adjust, trick out. 
கோதை - a flower wealth; by meto. a damsel. 
கோப்பு - provisions, food for a journey. 
கோல் - a staff; arrow. 
கோள் - contents; estimation; quality. 
கௌவு - seize, clutch. 
சந்தனம் - sandal-tree. 
சமழ் - suffer shame or distress. 
சலம் - trickery. 
சா - die. 
சாகாடு - cart. 
சாக்காடு - death. 
சாந்து - fragrant unguents. 
சாயல் - reflected image, form, beauty, excellence.   
சாய் - grass; lean, fall. 
சாரல் - the side and slopes of a mountain range.   
சார் - join, be close to, rely on, be dependant on. 
சால - much. 
சால் - abound. 
சாற்று - announce. 
சான்றவர், சான்றோர் - the  excellent. 
சிகை - course at a meal. 
சிதர் - diffuse, spread. 
சிதல் - white ant. 
சிரல் - the kingfisher. 
சில்லை - an utterly worthless woman. 
சிவல் - a partridge. 
சிற - abound.
சிறப்பு - politeness, courtesy; excellence, splendour; renown.
சினம் - anger. 
சீர் - position dignity; excellence, virtuous conduct. 
சுடர் - flame; sun. 
சுடு - burn.
சுட்டுக்கோல் - a poker. 
சுர - gush forth, yield. 
சுரம் - (a path through the) arid jungle or desert land.
சுரும்பு - a beetle, bee. 
சுரை - gourd.
சுற்று - circuit, limit; surround, gird. 
சுனை - tingle, itch. 
சூடு - brand, scar; wearon. 
சூத்திரம் - doctrine, formula, aphorism.
சூல் - scoop out. 
சூழ் - surround; deliberate, debate.
செ - red, bright yellow, golden; by meto fiery; right, good. 
செம்புனல் - the fresh, pure flood.
செம்மா - (in loco) exult.
செயிர் - wrath. 
செய் -do, perform; make into; acquire, merit; profit, help,give. 
செலவு-advancing to meet. 
செல் - go, pass away, march by; reach; approach.
செல்வம் - wealth. 
செழு, செழும் - rich, fertile, luxuriant. 
செறி - become dense ; stick close to, cling to, be attached, fasten on; hoard.   
செறு - afflict, restrain, be wrath with. 
சேக்கை - nest. 
சேண் - remote, far off. 
சேய் - distance [Opp. அணி]. 
சேர் - join, attach; acquire; fall to the lot of; come to attach; approach; gather. 
சேர்ப்பன் - a chief whose capital is a sea-port. 
சேறு - sweetness; mud; wet soil. 
சொல் - a word; say, speak, utter. 
சோர் - flow down, slip, omit. 
ஞாயிறு - the sun. 
ஞாலம் - earth, world. 
ஞானம் - knowledge. 
ஞெமிர் - compress; bruise. 
தகர் - be broken, shattered. 
தகு - fit, be becoming. 
தக்கார் - the worthy. 
தங்கு - abide, be stable.
தடி - flesh.
தடுமாற்றம் - perplexity. 
தணி - be relieved, grow cool, cause to diminish.     
தண் - cool. 
தண்ணம் - a funeral drum with one head.   
தண்டு - staff; separate. 
தமர் - kindred. 
தயங்கு - shine; wave; hang. 
தலை - head; place, also a postposition of the'7th Case; what is chief extreme point. 
தவசி - an ascetic. 
தவு - fail; perish. 
தழங்கு - roar. 
தழால் - the support of. 
தளிர் - a tender shoot. 
தளை - bond. 
தறி - a wooden post. 
தா - give, produce; bring; reflexive pronoun ‘self’. 
தாயத்தவர் - the heirs. 
தார் - garland; bear, endure. 
தாள் - endurance, energy: a trunk or stem; foot. 
தாற்று - sifting, merely bandying words; sift, fan. 
தானை - a cloth, robe. 
திகழ் - shine, glitter. 
திங்கள் - moon. 
திண்ணறிவாளர் - people of firm, stedfast mind. 
திரி - change; wander about. 
திரு - wealth; Lakshmi: goddess of fortune. 
திரை - wave; (meto.) sea. 
திளை - gather thick round. 
திறன் - goodness. 
தின் - itch; eat. 
தீ - fire; a spark; evil. 
தீண்டு - touch. 
தீம் - sweet. 
தீர் - remove: get rid of; cure. 
தீர்த்தம் - a sacred stream. 
தீற்று -  feed with the hand. 
து, துய் - eat, enjoy.
துகில் - rich attire. 
துச்சாரி - profligate. 
துஞ்சு - die. 
துடி - a drum. 
துடை - wipe off, do away with. 
துணிவு - decision, determination. 
துணை - assistance, help-meet;  partner; measure; until. 
துணைமை - ability. 
துத்து -  food. 
துப்பு - power. 
துப்புரவு - enjoyment; means of enjoyment.
துவை - spiced food. 
துழாய் - mixed, mingled up. 
துளக்கு - agitation. 
துறவோர் - ascetics. 
துறை - a haven 
துன்(னு) - gain; crowd. 
தூங்கு - cling to, linger; hang on; slumber. 
தூணி - a grain, measure. 
தூர் - root 
தூற்று - publish abroad. 
தெரிவு - understanding. 
தெருமரு - be perplexed. 
தெருள் - be clear. 
தெளி - understand. 
தெள்ளிது -  what is clear: accurate knowledge. 
தெள்ளு - sift out, throw up; examine. 
தெற்றென - immediately,  certainly.
தேசு - lustre. 
தேமா - sweet mango. 
தேம் - sweetness; honey. 
தேய் - waste away ; wane, grow less; pine away. 
தேரை - a frog. 
தேர் - enquire, discriminate. 
தேர்வு - comprehension 
தேறு - be sure, know clearly;  trust. 
தேற்றம் - certainty; assurance, confidence, accuracy. 
தை - penetrate. 
தொகு - collect, join. 
தொடர்பு - associations, intimacy
தொடி - a bracelet, bangle (meton.): 'a lady'. 
தொண்டு - slavery, a slave. 
தொலைச்சு - destroy. 
தொல் - ancient. 
தொல்லை - antiquity. 
தொழு - leprosy; pay homage. 
தொழ்த்தை - slave girl. 
தொறும், தோறும்- every, whenever: a distributive suffix. 
தோய் - blend with, touch; reach. 
தோள் - shoulder, arm: person. 
தோற்றம் - light; appearance. 
 நகு - shine; smile, deride. 
 நகை - a laugh. 
 நசை - desire, hope, expectation. 
 நச்சு - desire; lust after. 
 நடை - walk in life; position. 
 நட்பு - friendship. 
 நந்து - grow; wax, die.
 நம்பு - desire. 
 நய - love. 
 நயம் - goodness; wise decorum. 
 நரை - grey hair; age. 
 நலி - afflict. 
 நல் - good, goodly.  
நவில் - teach, learn; tell. 
நவை - fault. 
நளி - great. 
நள், நள்ளு- approach, join, contract friendship. 
நறவு - fragrance 
நனி - very, much. 
நன்றி - a benefit. 
நாடன் - lord of the land. 
நாடு - a land; covet; seek out.  
நாண் - modesty; shame. 
நார் - cord, generally of vegetable fibre.   
நாவாய் - a ship. 
நாறு - yield perfume. 
நாற்றம் - fragrance. 
நானம் - musk. 
நிகர் - one's inferior; equal. 
நிச்சல்,  நித்தல் - ever or assuredly. 
நிரப்பு- poverty, beggary. 
நிரயம் - hell.
நிரை - herd, row, line. 
நிலவு - abide 
நிலை - state 
நிறம் - colour (golden); the grow of youth. 
நினை - ponder, reflect. 
நின் - your 
நீ - forsake; abandon. 
நீசர் - base men 
நீர் - water; goodness; nature. 
நீலம் - blue (lotus) flower. 
நீறு - ashes. 
நுகர் - eat; experience. 
நுண் - refined; subtle. 
நுதல் - forehead. 
நூக்கு - shove, push. 
நூல் - literature, book, a systematic treatise. 
நூறு - a hundred; crush. 
நெடி - delay. 
நெடு - wide, vast. 
நெய்தல் - a water-flower. 
நெறி - way; conduct. 
நெற்று - dried pulse in pods. 
நேர் - comparison; rectitude; opposition. 
நொய்யது - what is minute, transcendent. 
நோ - feel pain; complain of. 
நோல் - endure; do penance. 
பகு - divide, share. 
பகடு - bullock. 
பகர் - say, speak. 
பசலை - sallowness. 
பசும் - green, young, fresh. 
பசை - cling to. 
பஞ்சி - cotton.
படர் - proceed; spread as a sore.
படி - sink down. 
படு - suffer, fall; be, abide, befall: pertain to; concern.
படை - instrument. 
பட்டினம்- a sea-port. 
பண்பு - nature: good qualities; excellence.
பணை - flourish, grow thick.
பண்டம் - any vessel, thing, baggage. 
பதக்கு - a dry measure of two,  மரக்கால் of half தூணி.
பதி - city.
பத்தர் - trough. 
பந்தம் - real attachment. 
பய - yield. 
பயன் - fruit; aid; yield. 
பயின் - glue. 
பர - spread; extol. 
பரப்பு - table-land. 
பரி - a horse; grieve over; love, desire; pull to pieces. 
பரிசு - dignity. 
பருமம் -  a saddle, pillion.
பருவம் - season.               
பல் - tooth; many               
பல்காலும் - often.          
பழை - old.              
பறை - a drum.            
பாகன் - an elephant - keeper.     
பாணன் - minstrel.
பாணி - hand.            
பாதிரி - a trumpet-flower tree.             
பாத்து - sharing.      
பால - things that pertain to.         
பாற்று - what may be classed among things that.       
பாவை - A puppet: a lady.   
பாழ் - desolation.
பிணி - disease, a bond, infliction.           
பிதற்று - blab, speak folly.               
பித்தர் - fools.         
பிரிப்பு - mental perturbation.    
பிலம் - cave, mine.           
பிழை - fault; escape; miss; commit a fault.
பிற  - other; be born.             
பிறங்கு - swell           
பிறழ் - vary.              
பிறன் - one's neighbour.      
பிறிது - anything else. 
பிறை - the crescent moon.          
பீடு - pride.             
பீள் - embryo, germ.           
புகல் - declare.
புக்கில் - a permanent abode.        
புடை - side; hypothesis. 
புடைப்பெண்டிர் - loose women.            
புணர் - join, unite.
புதவு - door.
புத்தோடு - a new pot.
புரி - desire; do, perform. 
புரை - fault; resemble.             
புல - pout. 
புலம் - a sense; sensation. 
புலன் - place; sense. 
புலை - silly. 
புல் - mean; grass. 
புல்லாப்புன்கோட்டி -  low heterodox school. 
புல்லு - join, agree : embrace. 
புல்வாய் - a kind of deer. 
புழுக்கல் - parboiled rice. 
புள் - fowl, bird. 
புறம் - the back, or outside. [Opp. அகம்]
புனம் - an upland plain fit for dry cultivation, and wooded.
புனல் - a stream, torrent. 
புனை - adorn. 
புன் - mean. 
பூணு, பூண் - put on, assume the yoke or harness. 
பூழை - wicket gate, smaller gate in a larger. 
பூழ்- a quail.           
பெடை - a hen; any female. 
பெண்ணை - palmyrah tree. 
பெய் - rain, pour into; throw carelessly; serve up in.
பெய்வளை - bracelets strung on. 
பெருகு - increase. 
பெருமிதம் - greatness. 
பெறு - obtain, gain, bear (a name), fetch (a price),  gain, attain to, beget. 
பெற்றி - nature, acquired character. 
பேடி - an hermaphrodite.       
பேதை - a simpleton.              
பேராண்மை - manly excellence.         
பேறு - gain; birth.
பைய - by degrees, slowly, softly. 
பொ- perforate. 
பொங்கு- swell, foam, rage. 
பொச்சா - forget. 
பொத்து - be hidden or stored up in, envelope. 
பொய்கை - a tank. 
பொரு  - fight; dash against. 
பொருள் - what belongs, property; reality; meaning.
பொலி - be conspicuous; increase.
பொழிப்பு -an epitome in plain easy prose. 
பொறி - spot; writing; destiny.  
பொறை- patience. 
பொற்றொடி - lady with golden bracelets. 
பொன்று - die, perish. 
போகம் - enjoyment. 
போத்து - hollowness. 
போர் - war; envelope 
போற்று - guard; cherish. 
மஞ்சு - a cloud. 
மடம் - ignorance, stupidity, folly, artless simplicity.
மடு  - kindle. 
மணி - a gem 
மண்டிலம் - sun 
மண்டு - swarm; grow vehement; wax fierce 
மதலை - support. 
மதி - full moon; estimate ; esteem.
மதுகை - strength. 
மதுரம் - sweetness. 
மம்மர் - delusion 
மயல் - confusion. 
மரத்தார்- person irrational as tress. 
மரபு - course; what is sanctioned by custom; line.  
மருங்கு - side, limit. 
மருவு - embrace. 
மருள் - be bewildered.
மலங்கு - an eel. 
மலி - be full 
மல்கு - abound, swell. 
மல்லல் - abundance, fertility. 
மறி - the young or any quadruped. 
மறு - other: a spot, stain. 
மறை - a secret. 
மற்று - but, besides. 
மனை - a mansion, house 
மன் - as a particle=indeed, forsooth
மன்றம்  - a hall of assemblage. 
மன்னு - abide. 
மாக்கள் - base people; irrational beings 
மாசு - fault, black. 
மாடம் - a mansion 
மாண் - glory. 
மாதர் - woman; beauty. 
மாதோ - an expletive: O lady! 
மாத்திரை  - a moment; a limit. 
மாந்தர் - men, human beings. 
மாய் - die, disappear, perish. 
மாரி - rain 
மார்க்கம்- way. 
மால் (செங்கண்மால்) - Indra, king of celestial world.
மாறு - a return, recompence. 
மாற்றார் - foes.
மாற்று - deny. 
மானம் - honour. 
மிகு  - abound. 
மிசை -(a case ending)=over, above on, upon; suck, feed upon.
மிடி - affliction, 
மிடுக்கு - tightness. 
மிடை - be closely packed, mixed up with. 
மின்னு - lightning. 
மீ- above. 
மீக்கூற்றம் - eulogy, praise ; authority in words. 
மீட்டு - in return. 
மீதாடு  - move over surface. 
மீதூரு - throng, press on. 
மீன் -  a star, fish.
முடுகு - hasten 
முடை - ill odour. 
முட்டிகை - a jeweller's small hammer. 
முகம்புகு- come before one as a suppliant. 
முத்தம், முத்து - a pearl. 
முத்தரையர் -wealthy persons. 
முந்திரி -a minute fraction: (1/320)
முயங்கு - embrace; cling to. 
முரசம் - drum. 
முரண் - war. 
முல்லை - jasmine. 
முழங்கு - sound out, thunder
முளை -  a  germ. 
முறி - a tender shoot. 
முறுவல் - tooth. 
முற்று - become accomplished; become mature, maturity. 
முனி- detest, dislike. 
மூ- grow old; three. 
மூகை - one dumb. 
மூழை - a ladle. 
மெய் - body; truth, reality. 
மெல்லியர் - poor people. 
மென்மை - gentleness. 
மேலை - former. 
மேவு - love heartily. 
மேனி - body. 
மை - a fault; a cloud. 
மைந்து - bewilderment. 
மொக்குள் - a bud; a bubble in water. 
மொழி - a word; speak. 
மோடு - greatness  [Opp. ஏட்டை]
யா - tie, bind. 
யாக்கை  - the body, the frame. 
யாங்கணும் - everywhere. 
யாறு - a river. 
வஞ்சம் - deceit. 
வடு - fault: ulcer, scar. 
வண்ணம் - way, manner. 
வண்மை - liberality. 
வம்பலன் - a neighbour. 
வயங்கு - glitter, gleam. 
வரன்று- sweep things along. 
வருணம் - caste. 
வரை - a mountain ; a bank; refuse, reject.
வலவை - a shameless person. 
வலி - strength 
வல், வற், வன் - powerful, hard, cruel.
வல்சி - food. 
வல்லுதல் - is permissible. 
வல்லே - promptly. 
வவ்வு - snatch away. 
வழு - a slip, mistake, fault. 
வழுதுணை - brinjal.
வழும்பு - fat. 
வளம் - abundance. 
வளி - whirlwind, wind. 
வள் - strong, sharp. 
வற - grow dry, fail. 
வறிஞர் - paupers.
வனப்பு - adornment, grace ; beauty. 
வாக்கு - manner, appearance. 
வாதி - afflict, coerce. 
வாய்மை- reality, truth. 
வாரி - income.
வால் - a tail; purity, whiteness. 
வாளா - silently. 
வாள் - light; a sword, bright keen weapon.
வானகம் - heavenly world. 
விசும்பு - the sky. 
விடர் - a fissure, mountain cleft. 
விண்,விண்ணு - the sky. 
விதுப்பு - desire; eagerness, trepidation. 
வித்தகம் - learning, wisdom.
விய - wonder at,admire, praise. 
விரகு- means, tact. 
விரவு- commingle.
விலங்கு- a boast, irrational being; stand off; fail.
விழு- excellent. 
விழை - desire eagerly. 
விள்ளல் - separation. 
விளி- perish, cause; summon. 
விறல் - abundance; greatness. 
வீ - perish. 
வீடு - freedom, liberation, heaven.
வெஃகு - desire. 
வெகுளு - be wroth. 
வெந்தை - a cooked meal. 
வெம் - cruel. 
வெம்பு - glow with heat. 
வெய்ய - fiercely, hotly. 
வெருகு  - a tom-cat. 
வெற்பு - a hill. 
வென்றி - victory. 
வே, வேகு - burn. 
வேகம் - wrath. 
வேசை - a wanton. 
வேட்கை - desire
வேதிகை - a raised altar
வேல் - a weapon, lance.
வேழம் - an elephant. 
வேளாண்மை - liberality. 
வேள் - desire, long fort.
வை - place, put; abuse; store up.
வைகல் - day, daily. 
வைகு - tarry the night. 
வையம் - the earth; a chariot. 





Our Popular English Publications 
Tirukkural 
This book contains metrical translation by Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope, translation in prose rendered by Rev. W. H. Drew and Rev. John Lazarus and also the versions of Mr. F. W. Ellis for some selected couplets.   Rs. 10.00 

The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago 
V. Kanagasabhai, B.A.,B.L. 
This work sheds floods of light on the antiquities of the Tamil race, their Literature, Civilization, Commerce, Kingdoms, Foreign Trade etc.  Rs. 8.00 

The Treatment of Nature in Sangam Literature 
Dr. M. Varadarajanar, M.A.M.O.L.,Ph.D. 
In this treatise, the author expounds the keen vision and deep insight of the authors of the Sangam classics, in respect of the study and elegant portrayal of the floras and faunas in all their serenity and romanticism in every discernible detail.  Rs. 7.00 

Prof. P. Sundaram Pillai Commemoration Volume 
This volume contains articles in English and Tamil on philosophy, History and Tamil Literature etc. and critical study of characterisation contributed by eminent men of letters, for his immortal drama "Manonmaniam".  Rs. 8.00 

Tamil India 
Prof. M. S. Purnalingam Pillai, B.A.,L.T. 
In this work, the versatile author discusses in detail the hoary Tamil Language and Literature, Trade, Polity, Arts, Science, Philosophy etc., the study of which has, evidently, been neglected by the numerous oriental scholars of West and East drifted to the study of Sanscrit only.  Rs. 5-00 

Tamil Wisdom 
Edward Jewitt Robinson 
This author traces the antiquity and splendour of Tamil language and literature and the wisdom derived from the epigrams in Tamil. He has rendered the following works in English: 24 chapters in Tirukkural, Muthuray, Athisudi, KonraiVenthan, Cabilar-Agaval and Mariyathai-Raman.  Rs. 4-50 

Ten Tamil Ethics
Prop T. B. Krishnaswami, M.A.,B.L. 
This book is the collection of English Translation in lucid style, of ten ethical poems in Tamil viz., Athisudi, Konrai-Venthan, Ulaga-Neethi, Vetri-Verkai, Muthurai, Nalvazhi, Nanneri, Nithi-Neri-Vilakkam, Neethi-Venba and Aranericharam.  Rs. 4.00 

