







 kalingathupparani -English Translation - Kausalya Hart (in tamil script, unicode format)







Kalingathupparani -English Translation 
by Kausalya Hart   
 சயங்கொண்டார் இயற்றிய கலிங்கத்துப் பரணி
ஆங்கில மொழிபெயர்ப்பு - கௌசல்யா ஹார்ட்
In  unicode/utf-8 format
 


Acknowledgements: 
Our Sincere thanks go to Dr. Kausalya Hart (Univ of California, Berkeley, California, USA) for providing
a soft copy of the English Translation and for permission to include this work as part of Project Madurai collections. 
Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne, Switzerland.

© Project Madurai, 1998-2020.
Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted to preparation 
of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them free on the Internet. 
Details of Project Madurai are available at the website 
https://www.projectmadurai.org/
You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this header page is kept intact.


Kalingathupparani (The War of Kalingam) -English Translation 
by Dr. Kausalya Hart 

 Source: 
Kalingathupparani (The War of Kalingam) 
by Jayangondar 
English Translation  by  Dr. Kausalya Hart
(retired Tamil Lecturer)
South and Southeast Asian Studies
University of California, Berkeley, California, USA. 
-------------
Introduction
KALINGATHUPPARANI by Oṭṭakkuthar


	In 12th century CE, Jayangoṇḍār wrote the Kalingathuparani describing the war between Karunāgarathondaimān, the Pallava chief and the king of Kalinga, Anandavanman, at the time of Kulothunga Chola I (1070-1120).
	The book is divided into fourteen chapters. After the kadavul vāzthu (invocation), Jayangondar describes the beauty of the girls waiting to welcome their husbands when they return from the war. This part has lovely akam poetry. Later chapters describe the goddess and the peys and their lives. Most of the important characters of this text are the peys, something that is special to this book. 

	In the middle of the poem Jayangondar describes the life of Kulothungan. He was born to the Venki king Narendra and his queen, the daughter of Rajaraja Chola. Jayangondar describes the lineage of the Chola kings, Kulothungan’s birth, his family, his early life as a baby and as a young prince. As a prince and king he fought many wars and conquered many lands. He became king when Rajaraja died in battle and made the chaotic land flourish. When he wished to engage in a war with the Kalinga king, his commander-in-chief Karunagaran fought and conquered the Kalinga king Anandavarman. 

	The final chapters describe the Kalinga war as seen by one of the peys who saw the battle in the Kalinga country, came back to the goddess and described what he saw to the goddess and other peys. The poems describe how the goddess showed the peys the battlefield and finally how they made a porridge on the battlefield and served it to their friends and others. At the end the peys praise the king and his valor. 

Content of Kalingattupparani by Jayangondar 

	1. The song of praising gods and goddesses. The first chapter praises gods and worships them to protect Kulothunga Cholan I.
	2. The song of the warriors. In this chapter the warriors returning from the battlefield ask their women to open the doors for them. The poems describe the beauty of the women.
	3. The song of the Forest. The third chapter describes the forest where Anangu, the goddess and her servants the peys live.
	4. The song of the Temple. The fourth chapter describes how the Peys constructed a new temple for Anangu,	
	5. The song of the Anangu. The fifth chapter describes the beauty of Ananagu, the goddess.
	 6. The song of the suffering peys. In the sixth chapter, the poems describe how the peys, servants of Anangu, tell the goddess how hungry they are and ask for food. 
	7. Songs of magic.The seventh chapter describes how a pey from the Himalayas learned some magic and returned. He shows the magic to the goddess. 
	8. The song of the Chola dynasty. In the eighth chapter the Himalayan pey tells the goddess the history of the Chola dynasty from Vishnu to Karikālan and how the king Karikālan inscribed the history of the Cholas on the Himalayas as Nāradar had narrated it to him. The pey tells the history of the Chola kings from Karikālan until Kulothungan First. 
	9. The song of the hungry peys and the Himalayan pey. The ninth chapter describes how hungry the peys are and how they complain to the goddess. The Himalayan pey tells them that there will be a war between the Cholas and the Kalinga king in the Kalinga country and the peys will get enormous amounts of food from the battlefield. The peys are very happy. 
	10. The song of birth and growth of the Chola prince Kulothungan the First. In the tenth chapter, the goddess describes to the peys nthe birth of Kulothunga Cholan First, his early life as a baby and a prince, the wars that he fought as a prince and how he conquered many lands and how he became a king. At that time a Kuli pey that has seen the Kalinga war came and tells them about the battlefield.	
	11. The song of Chola army going to the war. In the eleventh chapter, a Kuli pey tells the goddess how the Kalinga king did not pay tribute to the Chola king and how the Chola king ordered the army to go to the Kalinga country to fight under the chief Karunāgaran, the ruler of Vaṇḍaiyar land. This chapter tells about the king of Kalinga country. 
	12. The song of the war.The twelfth chapter describes the war between the Chola warriors and Kalinga warriors.
	13. The song of the battlefield. The thirteenth chapter describes the battlefield. Anangu and her escort peys go to the battlefield and she shows them the warriors, elephants, horses, chariots and women and tells them about how they suffered in the war. 
	14. The song of the porridge. The fourteenth chapter describes how the peys cook porridge, eat and serve to others. The peys speak. The peys praise Anangu and the king Kulothungan the first.

This English translation of Kalingathup parani is divided into 7 Parts to make it clearer for readers. 
Part. 1. Praising Gods  (Poems 1-20)
Part 2. Warriors and Women (Poems 21-74)
Part 3. The description of Anangu’s Forest, temple and her body and ornaments.  (Poems75 -133)
Part 4. The description of the peys. Their emaciated bodies and poverty.
The pey from the Himalayas, his magic, the history of the Chola dynasty.
Part 5. Complaints of the peys. King Kulothungan’s birth and youth
Part 6. The Kalinga war and a description of the battlefield.
Part 7. The peys cook porridge
------------
 Kalingathupparani by Jeyangondar.
PART 1. Praising the gods.  (Poems 1-20)
 Chapter 1. Kadavul vāzhthu. Praising the gods.

1, 2. To make this world flourish 
and give good lives to all,
Shiva married the daughter of the Himalayas
as Vishnu, dark as a cloud
gave his sister Shakthi in marriage 
pouring water on their hands 
and Brahma the creator of the world
performed the marriage ceremony.
Let us praise him, 
so that our king Abhayan, Ubhaya Kulothungan, 
the heir of the Chola dynasty,
may live long.
He rules following the precepts of the Vedas 
and protects the earth goddess 
created by Brahma.
-------
3, 4. Let us praise the divine name of Vishnu 
the omnipresent god.
He gives his grace to the world
and revealed the universe in his mouth 
to his mother Yasoda when he was a child. 
Let us worship him so that our gracious king Abhayan,
seated under his matchless royal umbrella,
may prosper, protecting the wide world.
----------
5, 6. Let us praise four-faced Brahma, 
the origin of the world and creator of the four tracts of land—
hills, fields, ocean and forests—
the four aims of life—
dharma, wealth, pleasure and moksha—
and the four Vedas
so that our king Kuladeeban
may live long,
brightening his dynasty 
and protecting the four lands, the four directions,
the wide four oceans, and the four castes.
-------
7, 8. Let us worship the sun god 
who brightens the whole world surrounded by wide oceans, 
takes away deep darkness
and rules the whole earth with his unique wheel. 
May he give his grace to our victorious king Jayadungan
so that he may live long and rule the world
surrounded by cool oceans 
with his matchless wheel of law that removes poverty
and spreads his fame everywhere.
------
9, 10. Let us worship Ganesa, 
the five-armed elephant god, 
the scholar of the four Vedas.
He  abides within the love of his devotees
when they have only yogic thoughts 
and are without worldly desires.
May he protect our king, the enemy of famine,
the conquerer of all the  lands in all eight directions, 
planted many pillars of victory, 
and rules the whole world under his one gracious umbrella.
May he live long.
-----
11,12. Let us worship the feet of Murugan 
with twelve eyes and twelve matchless arms
that are brighter than golden mountains.
May the god give his grace to our emperor Abhayan,
born in the sun dynasty
and raised in the moon dynasty,
making both royal families shine.
May he rule all the lands surrounded by the oceans 
and all the directions under his one royal umbrella.
------
13. Saraswathi, the goddess of art and literature
abides on our king’s tongue. 
The beautiful goddess Lakshmi 
stays on a lotus 
and the goddess of victory shines,
adorning our king’s arms.
Let us praise them all.
------
14. The goddess of the earth thinks,
“My king has boundless good qualities
and the goddess of fame lives with him.
It is good for me to live with him also.”
Thus she abides with the Chola king 
as he pleases and nurtures the earth goddess
and covers her with his fame.
Let us worship the goddess of earth
so that our king may live long. 
------
15. When Kama, the god of love
shot his arrows at Shiva,
half of the fair body of Shiva,
the god of gods, became dark,
but Kama could not approach 
the lotus hands and feet of our goddess.
Let us worship the flower-like ankleted feet
of that powerful goddess, bowing our heads to her. 
------
16. Let us worship the goddess Parvathi 
so that king Abhayan may live forever and prosper, 
the protector of the Puzhi country 
and conqueror of the angry Pandyan king.
He made the Pandyan king 
run to the forest in the hills,
turning his feet red,
He bent his bow and fought and defeated 
the Chera king and his warriors. 
-------
17, 18  Let us worship the seven pairs of feet
of the beautiful seven goddesses Chāmundi, Abhirāmi, 
Varāhi, Kaumāri, Mayeswari, 
Nārāyani, and Indrāni.
They shine, lovely as vines.
Let us worship them 
to make the matchless tiger banner flourish
raised by the Chola king 
the conqueror of many kings 
whose banners are a boar, plough, deer,
lion, bow and fish in the Himalayas.

19. May the reciters of the Vedas prosper.
May it rain to nourish the crops.
May the crops that bring wealth thrive.
May the creatures of the world live happily forever.

20. May our king, the ruler of the world, prosper.
May the magnificent tiger banner 
of our victorious emperor prosper.
May his umbrella that protects the earth shine forever.
May his hands that give generously prosper. 
-----------
 
PART 2. Waiting for the Warriors.  (Poems 21-74)
Chapter 2. Kadaithirappu -  Women and Warriors.

Warriors  returning from the war ask their women to open their doors.

21. O lovely ones
as sweet as the nectar
that came from milky ocean,
your young breasts are small as dice,
your waists are as tiny as tudi drums
and your long dark eyes touch your ears.
Open your doors.

22. Your breasts grow every day
becoming large and round on both sides. 
Even scholars and sages
with their minds controlled and without worldly desires,
become weak when they see your still-growing breasts
that are ample and round.
Open your tall doors that are locked tight.

23. Your curly hair shakes beautifully
and you are as lovely as peacocks as they wake from sleep.
When you walk your anklets sing beautifully. 
You speak softly and your words are as cool as dew.
Open your doors.-
24. When you cannot embrace 
the generous king Naradungan 
in your sweet dreams, you become angry 
and fight with him in the day. Open your tall doors.

25. When your husbands embrace you, 
you pretend you are angry 
and prattle with your soft baby-like voices, saying,
“Do not hold our dress,
do not hold our dress.” 
But you really mean, 
“Do not let it fall! Do not let it fall!”
You stand without moving, showing your love.
O, girls, as lovely as swans, open the doors.

26. You feel happy in your dreams
and, thinking that all the love of the king Valavathungan
belongs only to you,
in the night you stroke
the marks of his nails on your breasts.
Open your doors.

27. Even when you want to have a fight
with your husbands, you smile.
Happy, they come near you
thinking that you are not angry with them anymore
as you smile at them 
with your sweet coral-like mouths
filled with teeth that glisten like diamonds. 
But then your eyes shed pearl-like tears.
Open your doors, open your doors.

28. O beautiful ones, 
when you pretend you are sleeping,
your young husbands, worrying you may wake up,
only hold your hands gently. 
But you continue to pretend to sleep
and do not open your sharp eyes. 
Open your doors, open your doors.

29. In the night, you have a dream
that you are in a procession with our king, 
worshiped by his enemies,
but it is only a dream and doesn’t happen in the day,
so you tell your friends 
what happened in your dream in the night. 
Open your doors.

30. You wear pearl chains 
and coral necklaces on your lovely breasts
that the handsome red mouths
of your husbands have kissed.
Open your golden doors studded with diamonds. 

31. When your eyes fall on the lovely athi garland 
on the chest of the generous Chola monarch Mānadan
you search for your eyes
because you do not know where they have gone.
Open your tall golden doors. 

32. Your fish-shaped eyes that reach to your ears 
and touch your beautiful ear rings are long and cruel
like the weapons of our Chola king, 
adorned with a Vanji garland.
He defeated the Pandyan king with his fish banner 
and made him run away frightened from his Kudal city. 
O, beautiful ones! Open your diamond-studded doors.

33. When you embrace your husbands
you are excited and cannot sleep.
Your coral-like mouths and dark eyes become red. 
Your feelings cannot be controlled
and you smile with joy.
Open your doors.

34. You are excited when you embrace your husbands
and your clothes become loose. 
You take the bright rays of the moon
thinking that they are your clothes 
and try to wear them.
Open your doors.

35. Even though the victorious king Jayadharan 
embraced you in the day, you think it was a dream. 
You tell your friends what you saw in your dream
and when they tease you and laugh 
you realize that he really came and embraced you.
Open your doors.

36. O shy, lovely girls!
Your husbands promised 
that they would not leave you
but they went away and now you suffer.
At night, your passion grows so strong
you can only pretend to sleep. 
Open your adorned golden doors. 

37. Intoxicated, you didn’t know
what you were doing
and you slept on your husbands’ chests all night, 
making them beds of pleasure.
Now you do not know dawn has come.
Open your beautiful golden doors.

38. You wait for your precious husbands to return 
but they have not come yet.
You close your minds 
and doors in disappointment,
but then open them immediately in hope.
Open your doors.

39. As you walk your two breasts
look like two lovely lotus buds
that bloomed on a green stalk
that rose from your navel.
Open your beautiful golden doors.

40. When the Pandiyan kings with fish banners, 
were defeated by the Cholas and ran into the forest
you were brought from the Pandyan kingdom 
and now are kept in Chola palaces. 
O lovely ones, open your doors. 

41. O women of the Kerala mountains 
and the Tulu country!
You are the tribute given to the Chola kingdom
that flourishes with abundant rolling water.
Open the doors of your homes.

42. O beautiful ones, 
your priceless chains dance on your breasts
and your eyes dance, reaching to your earrings.
You embrace the arms of your beloved husbands
and dance like peacocks that dance on the hills!
Open your doors.

43. O girls of the Karnataka land!
Mixing some Telugu with some Tamil
you prattle sweet words like babies 
and walk softly to your doors.
Open your golden doors.

44. You wish to fight with your husbands
when they embrace you, 
and you say “Don’t embrace me!”
But then you faint when their hands 
that hold you become loose. 
Open your golden diamond-studded doors. 

45. When your passionate husbands
come to love you, their eyes grow red.
You see them and feel excited.
You smile and tease them 
and their passion grows.
Open your golden, decorated doors. 

46. O terivai women,
you wake up with bright faces and smile.
In one hand you hold your thick hair
decorated with fragrant flowers
and with the other you hold up 
your falling garments that flow everywhere.
Open your doors.

47. You remove your clothes 
when no one sees you
and look at the marks of the nails 
of your husbands on your breasts. 
Looking at your breasts 
you feel like a poor person 
who suddenly gains wealth
and your hearts are excited.
Open your doors. 

48. Kama, the handsome god of love,
thinks that your thick eyes
have both the power of the poison
and the sweetness of the nectar 
that rose from the milky ocean and he bows to you. 
Like Kama’s arrows that steal the hearts of all,
your eyes steal the lives and feelings of those who  love you. 

49. O beautiful ones, 
you walk smiling 
and your teeth, like a string of garlands,
glisten on your lotus faces.
Your teeth and your face shine
like the crescent moon and full moon together
and the light of both moons 
falls on the pearl chains 
that decorate your bud-like breasts. 
Come and open the doors.

50. O beautiful ones,
you pluck fragrant red lilies dripping with honey
and with them you pluck 
the dear lives of innocent young men. 
You twist them and put them in your hair.
Open your lovely golden doors.

51. When your lovers embraced you tightly,
they worried that they might have hurt you 
and left you gently and went away. 
You make circular drawings and think
that they will come back soon 
and you shed cool tears on the sand and make it wet. 
Your tears erase the drawings on the floor,
and you cry more and more. Open your doors.

52. When you fight with your husbands, 
your bodies become pale. 
Your round tender coconut-like breasts grow thin.
Your red-lined eyes that are like karuvilam flowers
shed tears. Open your tall golden doors. 

53. When you are with your lovers 
your thick bound hair becomes loose. 
The bands on your waist 
and your other ornaments grow slack
but both of your breasts stay firm. 
Such is your nature. Open your doors.

54. O beautiful ones, 
when you feel love for your husbands, 
you begin to speak nervously. 
Your sword-like eyes become red,
and your red lips become pale.
The moisture in your mouth becomes palm wine,
and you cannot think anymore. 
Such is your nature. Open your doors.

55. To cure the wounds
your husbands received in war,
you put your warm round breasts on them, 
and the medicine that they receive 
are the kisses that you give
with your mouths as sweet as fruit.
Open your tall pure golden doors.

56. O beautiful ones, 
you have wounded the young warriors 
by looking at them with your spear-like eyes.
You embrace them 
with your soft hands and your two breasts 
and that embrace is medicine to cure their wounds.
Open your doors.

57. O lovely girls, 
the bees that swarm around your hair
to drink honey from the flowers,
afraid that your waists may break
because of their weight,
fly away, but then they return because
their only refuge is your hair. 
They fly away from your hair, 
come back and swarm around it again and again.
Such is the beauty of your hair,
Open your decorated doors.

58. O young women, 
your shining anklets seem to cry out, 
“Stop walking, stop walking!
If both your breasts move, 
your waists will break, they will break.
You are our refuge, You are our refuge!”
Open your doors.

59. O beautiful shy women! 
Bees swarm around your hair
decorated with fragrant flowers. 
Your quarreling fish-eyes dart back and forth.
Your walk is as graceful as the Kaviri river
where waves break on both of its shores,
fish swim and frolic
and fragrant flowers dripping with honey
bloom everywhere. Open your tall golden doors.

60. O arivai women, 
the bees that swarm around your thick hair 
are like a roof that shades you 
because they worry that the moon will rise 
and pour its bright rays on your vase-like breasts 
smeared with sandal paste.
Open your doors.

61. O lovely ones, 
when you embrace your husbands, 
your eyes steal the redness of your mouths,
and your mouths steal
the whiteness of your flower-like eyes.
From your mouths you give
the nectar of love to your husbands.
Open your shining doors.

62. O beautiful ones,
your foreheads that are like crescent moons, 
sweat with small drops of pearl-like water.
The chains on your breasts swing.
Your thick forest-like hair 
decorated with chengaluneer flowers
becomes disheveled.
The bangles on your hands tinkle loudly
but you do not stop embracing your husbands.
Open your doors, Open your doors.

63. O shy ones, 
when you embrace your husbands, 
the strings around your waists do not move, 
but your lovely dresses become loose.
We sing the praise of our king of Kanchi city 
the conquerer of destroyed the Kalinga country. 
Open the doors and let us praise our king.

64. Listen to the valor of Karunagaran 
who sent his cruel arrows and conquered Lanka.
We sing the praise of Karunagaran 
conquerer of the Kalinga country. 
Open your doors.

65. When you are separated 
from your loving husbands,
you think of all their mistakes
and are distressed,
but then you see them and you forget everything. 
Open your lovely golden doors. 

66. When you play with your husbands, 
your fragrant breasts dance on your chests.
Bees sing swarming around your long hair 
decorated with flower garlands dripping with honey.
Your eyes dart and touch your ears and dance. 
Open your doors. 

67. O beautiful, shy girls, 
you silence the mouths of your parrots 
when they repeat the words you spoke
when you embraced your husbands 
in the excitement of love.
Open your golden doors studded with jewels. 

68. Every day you shiver 
and are afraid of staying alone 
where the bright moon shines. 
You enter into a room 
where there is no moonlight
but you are afraid of staying there also
because it is dark.
Open your beautiful golden doors.

69. You think, “He will come!”
and open the doors. 
You think “He will not come!” and close the doors. 
You open and close your doors all night until dawn 
and the knobs on your doors become loose.
Open your doors.

70. O sweet terivais, 
you quarrel with your husbands
but then when they make peace with you, 
you love them. 
In your excitement you seem to lose your minds 
and search for them. Open the doors.

71. Your lovers pacify you by saying, 
“Your words are musical and as sweet as nectar.”
You want them to praise you more
and you kill them with your murderous looks.
Open your tall golden doors.

72. O beautiful shy ones, 
you are afraid that your husbands 
who never stop loving you 
will be parted from you.
Your eyes shed tears like rain.
You mark the floor with your toes over the tears 
that have fallen from your eyes. Open your doors.

73. The beauty of your waists decorated with kanchi ornaments
and your round hill-like breasts 
torment your husbands. 
You take away their lives with your love.
Open your beautiful golden doors.

74. O lovely women!
You take the dark red kaluneer flowers
and the hearts of young men of this world 
and put them both on your hair.
Open your beautiful golden doors.
------------
 
PART 3.  Kādu, Kovil and Devi (75 -133)
The Forest and The Temple of the Goddess and the description of her.   Kādu, Kovil and Devi.
Chapter 3. Kādu pādiyadu. Song of the Forest  (75 -96)
The Forest of the Goddess

75. Let me sing the praise
of the forest of the goddess. 
She gives her grace to the peys and fills their stomachs
with the porridge they have made 
from the flesh and fat of the Kalinga warriors
who died in the war.

76. In the forest many trees can be seen—
burnt kārai trees, black cuurai trees,
veerai trees that smoke with fire,
burnt bamboo trees, 
the bark of pārai trees split off and fallen down,
burnt pālai trees, and dried oomai trees,

77. Fallen vellil trees, 
shrunken nelli trees,
dried thumpai and vel trees
split mulli plants,
destroyed valli trees, 
split kalli plants—
all are spread throughout the forest.

78. Dried vakai trees, shrunken kuhai roots,
ruined thetri trees, fallen pieces of vel trees, 
hardened ekai creepers, split bamboo trees, 
broken pungu trees, all are spread throughout the forest.

79. Why does the sun enter into all the open places 
in the cruel burning forest?
Does he search with his rays without stopping
for the paths where his wife’s shadow
Shayai might have gone?

80. The terrible eagles that circle around 
with their shadows 
look as if they are frightened of the heat
and when they fly away from the burning forest
they fly so fast without stopping
that even their shadows can’t be seen.

81. The shadows of the trees are frightened
and move away from the trunks of the trees 
because they think,
“If we stay here anymore
the sun may dry us with its heat,
or the dried-out trees may drink us up
because they cannot find any water.”

82. The burning red ground 
looks like a metal plate made of melted fire. 
The doves that fly above look like smoke 
rising from the flaming ground. 

83. The mouths of thirsty deer become dry 
and they try to drink water from the burning fields.
They lick the ground with their tongues 
but there is no water and as they try to drink 
they choke on the saliva that forest dogs have drooled. 

84. How could it be possible for anyone on earth
to walk through that burning forest?
Even the powerful gods in the sky 
do not put their feet on that ground 
because they fear its heat will burn them,

85. Listen, I will tell you 
why the sun does not ride on his wonderful horses 
in the sky day and night. 
Surely the horses will grow tired 
if they must return at night
without rest and cross through the heat
of the forest of the Anangu.

86. The white moon and the dark clouds, 
thinking they should somehow cross the forest,
move slowly, but it is so hot that they begin to run fast. 
Doesn’t the sweat that they shed as they run,
fall as rain and dew on the earth? 

87. Do you know why the gods in the sky 
use the clouds as a screen for shade 
and the nectar-dripping moon to fan themselves? 
Isn’t it because they cannot bear
the terrible heat that comes from the forest?

88. The burning trees, blackened and smoking,
look like peys that cannot run away from the forest.
They stand, weep and sigh
because the goddess Modi has ordered them to stay there.

89. Old snakes that come out 
of the holes from the tall dried trees, 
look like lean old, hungry peys.
They extend their dried tongues, 
from their waterless mouths. 

90. People walk in the forest 
and search for water all around and their eyes 
move like a ranging whirlwind. 
They see a water-like mirage in the desert 
that seems to float all around them 
but when they run near to drink the water, 
they cannot find any. 

91. As the whirlwind blows away the ashes
of the burned bodies of the warriors
the jewels that were buried
in the burned ash-covered ground 
shine like fire covered with smoke.

92. The dried-out bamboo plants,
unable to stand on the earth,
spit out pearls that look like tears.
Do they shed tears 
because they pity the desert for its heat?

93. The pearls thrown out from the bamboo plants 
and scattered all over the ground 
look like drops of water 
that the forest sweats because of the heat.
Do they look like blisters on the forest’s body? 

94. The strong waves of the ocean 
break constantly on the banks, 
and the elephants of the eight directions
wave their ears like fans
because they want to protect 
themselves from the heat of the wind 
that blows from the large hot forest.

95. The forest where the goddess Anangu stays 
looks like the battlefield 
where our famous king Abhayan fought angrily
with his enemies, the Pandiyans. 
The Pandyan kings ran away on paths
filled with stones and thorns
and crossed the rivers Vellaru and Kottaru 
that were filled with smoke that rose from the war. 

96. The monkeys in the Anangu’s forest 
that want to fight for our king 
as the monkeys did in Lanka
cannot find any sand
and cannot build a bridge. 
-----------

Chapter 4. Koyil Pādiyadu. Song of the Temple  -  poems (97 -120) 

The peys building a temple for the goddess. 

97. I will describe the new temple 
that the peys built for the Anangu
even though the god Brahma had built
an old temple in the forest before.

98. The peys placed in the foundation of the temple 
large diamonds of the queens of the enemy kings
of our king Mānadan, the conquerer.
He fought his enemies with his shining sword 
and sent them to the world of Yama,
and he sits under his royal umbrella and rules.

99. The peys built the walls of the temple 
by piling up the dark heads of the Chera warriors.
They were ordered to fight by their kings and lost their lives 
and their blood and fat were mixed and used 
as cement to build the walls.

100. The peys built the pillars 
and the beams of the temple
with large trees that the Chola elephants 
broke from the forts of the enemy kings 
of our king Abhayan, the patron of the learned. 

101. The peys constructed 
the vertical and the horizontal beams 
for the ceiling of the temple 
using the tusks and the large bones of the elephants 
that died in the war in Mythila city.

102. The peys decorated the ceiling of the temple 
with the yazhi, elephant, boar 
and lion banners of the enemy kings
that were brought from the battlefield 
where our king Abhayan fought and conquered 
his enemy Virudarajan and other kings.

103. The peys covered the roof of the temple 
and decorated it with the face cloth
of the angry elephants that fought in the battle 
where our king Cholasekaran fought with his shining sword 
in the bloody war on the banks of the Thungabathra river,
and conquered his enemy kings.

(Note: Kulothungan I, fought with the king of Kundalam, Vikramadithiya VI, 
and his brother Jeyadungan on the banks of the Thungabatra river and conquered them.)

104. The peys whose mouths are like burning wood, 
built the towers and the tall walls of the temple
that shine like silver, with the white bones
of the warriors they protected and guarded.

105. Strong peys planted two beautiful pillars 
at the front door of temple, 
bent a dark iron rod, and connected the pillars.
They hung crocodile-shaped decorations on the rods.

106. The peys hung the heads of warriors and children
as decorations for the walls, 
and the cloths made of fat for the the temple’s curtains.

107. The peys hung on the walls of the temple,
the winnow-like ears of the elephants 
of the Pandyans who did not obey the Cholas.
They used the crocodile-shaped decorations from Madurai
and hung them like swings studded with diamonds.

108. The pey devotees of the goddess
swept the temple, cleaned its floor 
using fresh blood as water, 
and sprinkled fat as flowers. 
Doesn’t the fat that they sprinkled,
look like shining lights that brighten the forest? 

109. The strong heroic warriors, never weary of fighting, 
worship the goddess and say, 
“Give us the boons that we want
and we will cut off parts of our body
and offer them to you.”
The loud sound of their pleas 
spreads everywhere
like the roaring sound of the ocean.

110. No one can describe 
the power of the sacrificial fire 
that the warriors made 
with their chest bones for firewood.
They used the blood that drips from their bodies
as ghee to worship the goddess. 

111. The warriors cut off their own heads 
and gave them into Anangu’s hands.
Those heads praised Korravai, the goddess of victory 
as the headless trunks 
stood and worshipped her.

 112. The andalai birds that saw 
the heads with long hair that the warriors had cut off 
and put on the large sacrificial mounds
thought they were also andalai birds,
but when they went near, them, 
they were frightened.

113. Some warriors cut off their heads for sacrifice
and thought, “We are cutting off our heroic heads
and our duties are over 
and there is nothing more for us to do.”
Some hungry peys saw the headless bodies 
wandering around and were pleased,
wishing to eat them.
They went behind the bodies
hoped that the bodies would fall. 

114. Some warriors shouted, 
“O goddess, here is the fresh blood
of a bull killed today.
Take this as our offering!”
Roaring like thunder the voices of those warriors
rose above and split the sky
and sounded like many drums beaten together.

115. A group of peys, the Sādagās, 
the guards of the goddess from ancient time, 
came to the forest
when they heard the sound of the drums
and the goddess Amari was pleased to see them. 

116. The Yogini girls walked and chattered
carrying swords in their right hands
and fresh heads of the warriors in their left. 
They approached the goddess as their waists swayed.

117. The peys were terrified to see the heads of the warriors 
that hung from the tops of the long bamboo trees, 
their eyes wide open, looking around and laughing.
The peys could not close their eyes to sleep at night 
thinking of those heads of the warriors. 

118. The large heads of the warriors 
hanging and swaying on long bamboo poles
and dripping blood everywhere like rain
looked like Yama’s long hook thrown 
to take the lives of the warriors.

119. The peys with their fire-like mouths,
searching for food for their babies, 
approached the murderous foxes whose screams
were like the sound of large drums,
and they grabbed the meat from their mouths.

120. The burning ground was filled 
with vultures that ate fat and flesh 
and the forest was filled 
with fire, cotton, rotten corpses, peys, 
and fighting foxes.
------------

Chapter 5. Deviyaip pādiyadu. Song of Praise of  the Goddess. (poems 121 - 132 )


121. Why should I describe the clothes and the ornaments 
on the body of the goddess saying 
“She has this, She has that" as others do? 
I will describe the parts of the body of goddess Modi 
that the devotees worship and praise. 

122. Her tender feet are decorated with anklets 
studded with large diamonds, pearls and stars 
and the cord used to tie the jewels 
is Adisesha, the snake, the bed of Vishnu
who carries the earth 
and the snake Vasuki that was used as the rope 
when the milky ocean was churned.

123. The goddess Kali dances 
praising the famous king Jayadharan 
the conquerer of the world, 
whom the Parani poems praise. 
When she dances and puts one foot on the earth 
carried by Adisesha and the elephants of eight directions 
that guard the world, 
she makes a hole in the earth so it shakes. 

124. The goddess decorates her breasts,
that look like two pots filled with nectar 
with beautiful pearl-colored powder 
and marks them with her own signet. 
Then she goes to the forest of Shiva 
wishing to unite with him, the rider of a bull
with the beautiful white crescent moon in his matted hair.

125. When Anangu embraced the god
with an eye on his forehead and long matted hair, 
the highest god Shiva was pleased 
and gave her an elephant skin for a dress,
the intestines of the elephant for her belt, 
and a snake to tie around her waist.
The goddess was pleased to wear them all.

126. Her divine womb 
gave birth to Brahma, the creator of the Vedas, 
Vishnu, dark as a cloud,
Ganesha dripping with ichor
and Murugan bright as gold,
the strong god with a spear, 
who, bending  his bow, shot his arrows, 
and destroyed the clan of Asuras. 

127. To please Shiva,
the goddess wears white pearl and coral chains 
on her golden breasts. 
For her upper cloth, she ties a snake that spits fire 
on her chest and then she goes to see 
Shiva, strong as an elephant,
and stays in the Kailasa hills 
wearing the skin of an elephant 
that eats round balls of food and drips ichor.

128. When the goddess takes in her hands the blood 
that pours like rain from the heads
sacrificed by the warriors and drinks it up, 
her hands become red 
and when she washes them in the ichor
dripping from the elephants, they become black.
Thus her lotus-like hands shine red and black. 

129. When the gods and the asuras 
churned the milky ocean, 
golden Meru mountain melted,
the wide oceans smoked without water, 
and all the directions became hot. 
Then when Shiva drank the poison 
that came out of the milky ocean 
and his neck became dark, 
the goddess gave him water like nectar
from her lips as sweet as fruits
and saved Shiva, the lord of the Himalayas.

130. The goddess melts for the goodness 
of her devotees and shows compassion to them 
and takes away the enmity of all the worlds. 
She has small pearl-like teeth, 
coral-like lips and a divine face. 
She speaks innocently like a baby prattling.
She looks in all directions with her beautiful eyes 
that extend to her ears. 

131. The goddess’s face shines like the bright moon,
the ancestor of the famous Vengi dynasty
that is as great and ancient as the Vedas, 
in which our king, virtuous and just Abhayan, was born. 
The kumkum on her face shines like the sun, 
the ancestor of Chola dynasty.

132. If the goddess wears on both ears 
the great mountains of the earth
they become her earrings. 
If she strings the hills on a rope 
and wears them on her chest,
they become her chain.

133. If she holds mountains in her lotus hands, 
she can use them as ammānai balls
or kazangu to play with. 
Is there anything that
she cannot do if she wants?
--------------
 
PART 4 Peys   :  Description of the Peys (verses152-211) 
The story of the Pey from the Himalayas, its magic and it  tells all the Peys, the history of the Chola kings  
 as it was described by Narada to him. (Chapters 6, 7 and 8) 
  Chapter 6. Peyhalaip pādiyadu. Song of the  Peys (134 -152)


Description of the peys.

134. All the divine beings
worship the feet of mighty Anangu.
I will describe the alagais of the Anangu,
staying with her always and obeying her orders

135. The peys grow thinner every day,
and because they are hungry
their stomachs look like big empty pots
and their hands and legs 
look like tall dark palm trees in the forest.

136. Their mouths compete with deep caves
because they want to be deeper than they are. 
Their stomachs are never full 
however much they have eaten. 
When they sit bending their long legs, 
their knees rise four and a half feet above their faces. 

137. Their thin, fleshless bodies look like unburned wood 
and their bones stick together with their nerves. 
They shout often, “We do not get any porridge 
from the battlefield where men are killed
and we are weak now. How could you ask us to work?”

138. Their cheeks are so thin that they stick together
inside their mouths and cannot be pulled apart.
Their eyes are as bright as burning torches
and look like small round hills with deep caves
where one can enter and see inside. 

139. Their dried backs without any flesh 
look like boats that are overturned.
Their large navels look like holes 
where snakes and huge lizards can enter and sleep. 

140. The hair on their bodies hangs like snakes
and the holes on their old noses are filled with moss.
Owls live in their ears
and bats fly back and forth between their two ears.

141. Their teeth are like the tips 
of axes and plows arranged together.
They use snakes for their thali chains 
and chameleons for their pendants.
Their heads touch the sky and split it.
They have long lips that hang down and touch their chests.

142. If the baby Alahais see the bamboo plants near them, 
they shout, “Mother, mother!”.
If the mother Alahais see thin camels, 
they say, “These are my children, my children!”
and carry them on their waists.

143. The peys are so hungry 
that their stomachs have burned
like the forest where the Pandiyan king 
hid with his fish banner
when he was chased by our king Abhayan
who holds a tiger banner and gives with his golden hands 
more to the world than the clouds. 

144. The peys do not get any food and they think, 
“Our death is near!”
They worship the goddess Anangu,
and stay near her without moving even once
from wherever she tells them to stay.

145. Some peys of the Anangu are lame 
because they slipped and fell
and broke their ankles on the brains
of our king’s enemies that spilled 
and spread all over the battlefield
where our king Abhayan’s 
elephants that can attack lions fought.

146. Some peys of Anangu have broken their right hands because when they made porridge, 
pounding the white teeth of the warriors as rice
and using the tusks of the elephants for pestles, 
the pestles hurt them on the battlefield
where our king Virudaraja bhayangaran fought his enemies. 

147. Some peys of the Anangu are blind
because the hot porridge that they cooked 
mixing blood and intestines 
splashed and blinded them in one eye 
on the battlefield of Chakkarakkottam, where our king, Virudarāja Bhayankaran, conquered his enemies. 

148. Some peys of the Anangu are dumb 
because when they cooked sweet hot porridge 
on the battlefield in Madurai, 
praising the king of the Ponni river that nurtures the fields, 
and ate it hot, their tongues burned
and they became dumb and unable to speak. 

149. Some peys cannot hear because they became deaf
when they heard the roaring sound
of the victorious warriors on the battlefield 
where our Chola king Abhayan, 
adorned with the aimbadaithali ornament, 
conquered his enemies in the city of Thimiri,
riding on his horse that was so strong
that it could fight an elephant.

150. Some peys of Anangu are short
because the Chola peys brought short female bhudams 
that served the Pandiyan warriors,  died in the war
and married them and their new wives 
gave birth to short baby bhudams. 

151. Some peys of the Anangu are hunch-backed
because when a group of them bathed, 
swimming in the stream of blood,
they got sick with kurakkuvādam 
and became hunch-backed on the battlefield
where the Chola king Gangaikonda Cholan fought 
and destroyed the country of Kadāram 
surrounded with wide, sounding oceans.

152. Some peys of the Anangu have broken fingers 
because they were cooks and they entered the ocean, 
swam and hurt their fingers on the battlefield 
where our Chola king fought ferociously 
and conquered Lanka and the southern Pandiyan country.
-----------

Chapter 7. Indira jālam - The Magic show by a Pey. (poems 153- 177) 

A pey ran away to the Himalayas because he was afraid of the goddess and returned 
from the Himalayas and showed the  magic that he has learnt there,
 to the goddess and the servant peys.

153. The cot for the goddess was made of bones, 
tied with intestines and painted with red blood.
Small bhudams sat under the cot
and they became the legs of the cot.
The goddess sat on the cot 
and the peys stood around her and whispered to her. 

154. On the cot five mattresses were piled
and peys were bent and made into pillows.
Bedsheets were made of the white fat of warriors 
as moonlight fell on the bed to make it bright. 

155. The goddess protects the Cholas
and destroys the Pandiyans in the war.
She carries a pindipalam weapon and sat on the bed.
Idahinis, her female servants, 
stood around both sides of her bed
and fanned her to chase away the flies.

156. The tall chief pey of the temple held a stick 
decorated with the nerves and bones of elephants,
and came near the goddess and worshipped her. 
He wore a shirt made of fat
and decorated with the intestines 
of warriors that had died in the war. 

157, 158. The chief pey of the temple said, 
“A messenger was sent 
by the Chola king Suraguru to Yama, 
and he cut off his head and gave it to you as a sacrifice. 
But a thief pey stole that head and ate it. 
You cut off that thief pey’s head 
and put it on the messenger’s body.
Some of the relatives of that thief pey
were afraid of you and the Chola king
and ran away from here.
You know them all in your divine heart.
Some of the peys ran away and one of them 
went to the Himalayas and came back and told me, 
‘I am a devotee of the goddess and I want to see her.”
This pey has not done anything wrong. 
What is your gracious order?”

159. The Anangu heard the request
and ordered, “Bring him!”
and the temple pey called the pey from the Himalayas 
and he came slowly near the Anangu,
worshipped her and said, 
“I was worried about coming here, 
but I am approaching you 
because you have ordered me to come. 
O Anangu, forgive me and give me your grace.”

160. The Anangu said, “When I cut off the head
of the thieving kuli pey 
and put his head on the headless pey,
I forgave all of you and there is no reason for you to worry.”

The Pey from Himalaya says:

161. The pey from the Himalayas
worshipped the goddess and said, 
“I am saved by your kindness. 
When I stayed in the hills of Himalayas,
I learned thousands of fine magical tricks. 
Please sit, look at them and enjoy.”
Then the pey from the Himalayas
showed the scenes of war with his magic 
and described them
as the goddess and all other peys looked on.

162. He said, “O goddess, 
show us your grace with your kind eyes.
Do you see the elephant trunks on my hand?
When I make them come into my other hand, 
they change into the heads of angry elephants.

163. “O goddess, See! The peys drink the blood 
that comes from the elephants’ heads,
scream like loud thunder, and run around in circles.
See! there are headless bodies floating there.

164. “Hail to our goddess! 
There is so much to show you!
See the terrible fight 
on the battlefield in the city of Kadakkam 
where king Abhayan got victory. 
See now that great Parani of the battlefield!

165. “O goddess, see the horses falling and dying!
See how the limbs cut from their bodies throb!
See how the rutting elephants are frightened and run away!
See the blood flowing like hundreds of rivers!

166. “O goddess, see how the arms that were cut off
float in the blood of rivers.
See the long intestines that float there.
See how the foxes pull the broken legs of the warriors to eat 
and slip on the warriors’ brains.

167. “O goddess, see the fat
and see how the ground stinks with it!
See the battlefield filled with corpses.
And see some of the stranger peys 
that do not belong to us.”

168. When the pey from the Himalayas
showed all these things, 
the other peys thought everything was real 
and were frightened. 
Then, wanting to eat the illusory meat they had seen, 
they fell one over the other on the empty floor
and broke their legs. 

169. The peys that fell on the floor, 
shouted “Here is fresh blood!”
They scooped and scooped the imaginary blood
with their empty hands, got up and then fell again. 
They searched for the meat on the floor 
thinking that the flesh that they had in their hands 
might have fallen.

170. The peys said,
“We got clothes made of fat to wear!”
and they tied imaginary cloths of fat around their waists
with their empty hands. 
They bit the air and ground their teeth
as if they were biting the heads of the warriors.

171. One thin pey, looked like a rope on a hanging pot,
imagined that there were bodies on the floor 
and tried to grab them. 
The other peys also ground their teeth, 
and fell on the floor one over another 
and tried to grab bodies where there were none.

172. Because the peys fell on the floor, 
their nails huge as winnows broke
and their faces became hot and wounded.
The Yogini women saw them
and laughed swaying and bending their waists
so much that it seemed their chest bones might break.

173. When they saw the magic of the pey 
from the Himalayas, 
the peys wanted to eat flesh and became very hungry.
They worshiped their ruler, Anangu, 
trembled and told her, “All of us will die. 
Please stop the magic of the Himalayan pey right now!”

174. The pey from the Himalayas 
worshipped the goddess and said to her, 
“All the scholars of arts and other skills 
come to our victorious king Abhayan 
with a shining sword 
and ask him if he would like to see all the tricks 
that they have learned. 
Our king sees all our magic 
and you should also see my magic 
and give me your grace.”

175. All the other peys said, 
“O magician, O sinner! 
If you do any more magic and hurt us,
we swear on our queen Anangu that it is not right.”
The Anangu told the pey from the Himalayas, 
“Now stop your magic. 
Tell us where have you learned all your tricks.”

176, 176. The pey from the Himalayas said.
“When you and the king Suraguru became angry at me, 
I was afraid, and thought that I should not stay here, 
and went to the Himalayas.
There Auvai taught me many kinds of magic
and told me that your anger will go away 
if I go to you and show you my tricks.
She also said that the divine Rudra Yogini 
is your old devotee 
and I could learn many things from her.
She asked me to stay with her.
And so I spent some time there learning magic.”
------------

Chapter 8. irāca pārampariyam  (Poems 178-211)  

History of the Chola Dynasty told by the Pey to the goddess as he heard from sage Naradar.
(Nāradar, the sage told the history and the victories and history of the Chola kings  before and 
after the king Karikālan.  Karikālan inscribed the history of the Chola kings as Nāradar told him 
on the hills of the Himalayas. The speaker of the first part of this section is the pey from the 
Himalayas and later the Anangu.)

The Pey from Himalaya says:   

178. When the Chola king Karikālan went 
to the northern countries to fight, 
the Himalaya mountain stopped him. 
He turned the hill upside down with a chendu weapon, planted his tiger banner on it and said
to Himalaya, “May you become as before!”
and made the hill straight again.

179. Nārada, the divine sage, the scholar of the Vedas, 
who knows past, present and future, came there,
praised and blessed the king Karikālan and said, 
“O king, there is no one equal to you
on this earth surrounded by oceans!
There is one thing I would like to tell you. Listen!”

180. Nārada continued, 
“In ancient times the sage Vyāsa, the son of Parasarar,
told the story of Bharatham to the elephant-headed Ganesa
and Ganesa wrote the story with one hand, 
using his tusk as a pen.
It is hard to describe the great benefit 
that the world received 
because of that wonderful work.

181. “The divine stories of Bharatham 
and the stories of the highest gods in it
are all like the true and ancient four Vedas. 
This Chola history that I am going to tell you
is as great as the stories of the Vedas.
You must inscribe this history 
on the summit of the Himalayas. 
Listen to this famous history.

182. “Vishnu is the first one of Chola dynasty. 
No one can describe him and his power. 
He is the creator of the world and its seven divisions, 
and the creator of humanity, praised by gods. 

183. “Vishnu engendered the sages
and they created the Rgveda, the Upanishads, the Ashtagams, 
the Sangidais and all the other sastras. 
Together, these contain the rules that instruct 
all people how to live.

184. “Brahma was born from the lotus 
growing from the navel of Vishnu
and all the Chola kings, protecting the earth 
were born in the dynasty of Brahma.
Chola history is like the faultless Vedas 
because the ancestors of the Cholas
are Vishnu and Brahma themselves. 
The god Vishnu of the Vedas 
was to be born as king Abhayan.”

185. The sage Nārada told the history of the Cholas 
beginning with Vishnu
who sleeps on a snake bed as Adisesha 
and presents himself to his devotees.
Nārada told the history up to Abhayan,
the king and the protector of this earth, and then departed. 
The king Karikālan continued telling the history
as Nārada had told him on the Himalayas.

The pey from the Himalayas continues to tell the the history of the Cholas to the Anangu. 

186. “Brahma was born from the lotus 
from the divine navel of the ancient one, Vishnu.
The great Marici was the son of Brahma,
and Kasiban, the compassionate king, 
was the son of Marici,
and the bright Sun god was born to Kasiban.

187. “King Manu, the son of Kasiban,
placed his son under the wheels of a chariot 
to do justice to a mother cow who lost her calf 
because the careless prince had killed it
when he drove his chariot. 
Even today, when the world hears his story,
it marvels at the wonderful sacrifice of the king.
King Ikuvagu was born to Manu.

188. “Ikuvāgu’s son was Vihuchi, 
and Kāhustan, the heroic one was born to Vihuchi.
The strong king Kāhustan, riding on an elephant,
conquered all the asuras 
and helped the thousand-eyed Indra and the other gods. 

189. “Kāhustan’s son Mandāda
was known for his kindness.
In his kingdom angry tigers and innocent deer 
stayed on the same riverbank and drank water.
His son was the famous Musuhundan 
and he conquered all the lands of the gods 
and ruled them majestically. 

190. “The king Brudulakshan 
helped the gods in the sky
by giving them the sweet nectar
when they and the asuras churned the ocean of milk. 
The Chola king Sibi cut his flesh 
and put it on a scale to save a dove.

191. “The Surādirājan was the first king of  the Chola dynasty, 
and he gave the titles Rājakesari and Parakesari
to the future Cholas.
The Chola kings with those titles
conquered and ruled all the seven worlds 
under the tiger banner.

192. “The Chola king Killivalavan
argued with Yama and told him what was right.
King Kāveran brought the river Kāveri 
to the Chola country.
The king Mrtyujit conquered Yama and told him
not to take lives in his country without warning. 

193. “The Chola king Chitran conquered Indra
and made him the tiger on the Chola banner.
The Chola king Samutrajit dug a channel
to connect the eastern and the western oceans
so that ships could go from one side to the other. 
The Chola king Panjapan cut his finger and gave his blood 
to the five thirsty yakshas. 
When a Chola king could not cross the ocean 
in his boats because there was no wind, 
he called Varuna and that god of wind came to help him.
Because the god Varuna obeyed him, the king gained the title, 
Varunarājanaip Panikondavan.

194. “The Chola king Thungeyil Erinta Cholan 
protected all the kings and his people. 
He conquered the asuras, flew over  their three forts
and brought affliction to everyone.
The Chola king Ubarisaran flew on a sky chariot 
studded with diamonds.
A Chola king increased dharma
and gave  his navy to the Pandavas
until the Mahabharatha war ended.

195. “When the king Killivalavan went 
to the underworld, he saw a Nāga princess 
with lovely spear-like eyes and white pearl-like teeth.
He fell in love with her and married her.
The Chola king Chenkanān released the Chera king 
Kanaikkāl irumporai from prison 
when the poet Poyhaiyār sang 
the Kalavalzi Nārpadu in praise of the Chola king.

196. “Karikālvalavan had inscribed 
the history of his ancestors as Nārada had told him on the Himalayas 
and returned to his country.
He rode on a strong elephant, 
conquered the Pandyan and Chera kings 
and the goddess of victory adorned his shoulders.

197. “Karikālan obtained a picture 
of his enemy king Pradābarudran 
and put out one of his eyes 
on the picture because Pradābarudran obstructed 
his workers when they built up the banks of the Kaveri river.

 198. “Karikālan conquered the city Kuruvi 
surrounded with ponds where fish frolic. 
He gave a hundred thousand gold coins 
to the Tamil poet Rudra Kannanār 
for composing the poem 
Pattinappālai that praises him.

199. “Karikālan conquered the Chera king Perunjerālathan 
and the Pandiyan king Nedunjeliyan, never retreated from battle,
and he made them wear torn clothes 
and carry lamps on their heads. 

200. “The Chola king Parānthahan 
riding on his elephant went to many countries under the sky and conquered them all. 
He conquered the Pandiyan land and Lanka and his fame spread everywhere.

(Parānthahan I, has the title “Veeranārāyanan.” He was the grandson of 
Vijayalaya Cholan and son of Adithya I)

201. “The Chola king Rajarajan I, 
the son of Parāndahan, started a festival 
on Sadaya Patchatram in the Chera country. 
He rode on a matchless elephant like the rising sun,
conquered Udagai city and took many elephants.

202. “The king Rajendra Cholan I, son of Rajaraja Cholan I,
went to the northern lands where the Ganges flows
and ferociously conquered them.
In the city of Mannai, he fed Ganges water
to his elephants that fought in the war.
He conquered the country of Kadāram
surrounded with roaring oceans with cool white waves 
and ruled it under his royal umbrella.

203. “The Chola king Rajadhirājan I 
conquered the city of Kampili
and planted his pillar of victory there.
He rode on his elephant 
that was decorated with a kimburi ornament, 
fought in Kalyānapuram and conquered that city. 
He stamped his tiger seal
on all the mountains in all directions. 

204. “The king Rajendra Chola, strong as an elephant, 
the grandson of Vijayālaya Cholan,
riding on his victorious elephant, 
conquered his enemy king
in the city of Koppai on the bank of the Krishna river 
and was crowned on the battlefield.
Sitting beneath his royal umbrella, 
he protected the world.

(The Chola king Rājendran was crowned on the battlefield when his brother Rājādhirājan 
died in the war as they both fought opposing the Chalukya king Agavamallan in the city Koppai, 
on the banks of Krishna river.)

205. “The Chola king Rājamahendran, 
followed new traditions
different than those of the Vedas,
the first books that described ancient traditions. 
The traditions that this king followed were superior to the laws of Manu.
He protected dharma and made it flourish
as he sat beneath his royal umbrella and ruled the kingdom.

206. “King Veerarājendran, brother of Rājamahendran,
fought with his enemies and conquered the Kunthalars 
in the city of Kudala-sangamam
and protected his people. 
After Veerarājendran, Kulothungan I,
became the Chola king and the world praised him, saying,
“What tapas has the earth goddess done for the king Abhyan to become king to protect her?”

207. “As long as all the three worlds abide, 
as long as the Vedas of the well-born abide, 
as long as the hills and the oceans on this earth abide, 
king Abhayan will rule this earth with justice 
and protect it.

208. “Without missing anything
king Karikālan wrote down 
the matchless history of the Cholas 
and their ancient dynasty as Nāradar narrated it 
on the summit of the Himalayas 
so that its tradition and its fame 
could never vanish or be destroyed.”

209, 210. The pey from the Himalayas finished saying, 
“When Karikālan finished writing,
he said, ‘If anyone reads this history 
all his wrong deeds will be forgiven.’”
The Anangu heard the lineage of 
our king Abhayan, the son of the goddess of earth 
and said to the Himalayan pey, 
“You are wise to remember this whole history 
and tell it to us. 
I am happier now than when I gave
birth to my son Abhayan.” 

211. The Anangu, the protector of all the peys 
and of the fame of the king Jayadungan, 
the ruler of all the world under his one royal umbrella, 
said, “The king will certainly protect this earth.”
-----------
 
PART 5 Chapter 9. Pey muraippādu. The complaints of the peys (poems 212-231)

The servants peys complain to the goddess that they are hungry and the goddess tells them 
that there will be a war and they will get plenty of food. They are pleased.

The servant peys complain: 

212. The servant peys of the goddess complained, 
“O compassionate goddess, beloved of Shiva
in whose divine matted hair the Ganges flows!
We were not born as the fortunate Bhudams
protected by king Abhayan,
but we were born as peys to suffer.

213. “Who can protect us unless 
you hear our troubles and show us your grace? 
We do not need a body if our lives
are going to disappear, 
just as there is no need for a fort
to protect a city that is already destroyed.

214. “We are so exhausted 
that we do not have the strength any more 
even to get more tired.
We grow thinner day after day 
and grow continually weaker. 
We could not stand against any enemy
and we could not escape from them. 

215. “We are like dried wood fit only for burning. 
Our bodies grow emaciated 
and we have no way to be healthy. 
We are so hungry that we want to die, 
but you make it hard for us even do that. 

216. “Even dying is hard for us.
Did we commit many sins in our last births?
Is that why the four-headed god Brahma
put hunger in our stomachs? 
We are sinners, there is nothing for us to eat.

217. “We are so thin that the wind blows us like chaff and we cannot stay in one place.
We are so hungry that we have eaten
half of our tongues and lips.
Now we have only half of our mouths. 
We are your slaves. 
Show us your grace and save us.

218. “If the other kings give him tribute 
our king Ahalangan gives his grace to them, 
but he shows no compassion to us.
His elephants stay in their sheds 
and rest without going to fight 
and so we cannot get our food from the battlefields.
See, we your slaves are very hungry,
growing thin and exhausted.

219. “Our noses smell fat, our lips throb, 
a1d our mouths feel the taste of meat 
as flies buzz around us.
We are alive only because we see these good omens
that show us that good things are coming,
otherwise we would die today.”

220. The servant peys breathed hard
and complained loudly.
The pey from the Himalayas
heard the complaints of the other peys
and approached the goddess.

221. He worshipped the goddess 
folding his hands and said.
“Listen, Goddess! 
Hear the omens that occurred 
when I was in the northern Kalinga country.

222. “The male elephants broke their tusks 
and their ichor dried up,
and the female elephants grew tusks,
and their ichor increased.
The bright lamps became dark
and the clouds poured red blood as rain.

223. “The drums tied with thongs around them, 
played without drummers.
The rainbow, the bow of Indra, arose in the sky at night.
Owls hooted in all the houses in the city. 
Foxes howled in the forests
and the smell of the burning sacrificial fire
spread like fire on the burning ground.

224. “Fragrant garlands stank of flesh,
Golden chains studded with diamonds lost their brightness.
Pictures of people on paintings dripped sweat
and water that came from springs smelled with blood.”

225. After saying this,
the pey from the Himalayas asked the Anangu,
“What do all these omens mean? Tell us.”
And the Anangu told the peys 
what the omens mean.

226. The Anangu said, “The omens that you saw 
in the northern Kalinga country 
will mean good fortune for you and the peys
because there will be a war.
Now I will tell you 
the meaning of our astrologer pey’s words 
and of his dreams. 

227. “The astrologer pey said that 
the elephants of the king Ahalangan 
the conquerer of the armies of his enemy kings, 
stand tied in chains and are ready to go to war,
and therefore there will be a Parani.”

228. The peys felt joy and said, “We will be fat.
We can eat the heads of the warriors!”
They danced until they were exhausted. 
They ground their teeth and wet their lips 
as if they were tasting meat.

229. The peys said to one another, 
“Do not worry about hunger, do not worry about hunger.
We will have food!”
They laughed and laughed, 
until their chest bones were about to break
and in their joy they forget their terrible hunger.

230. The peys shouted and danced
until they were exhausted. 
They asked the Anangu, 
“If we all get together,
and eat the porridge of the Kalinga war, 
will there be enough food 
for our cage-like stomachs?”

231. The Anangu replied, “Don’t fight among yourselves
about whether there will be enough food for you. 
The Kalinga war is twice as big
as the war in Lanka that is surrounded by the ocean.”
----------

Chapter 10. Avathāram Prince Kulothungan’s Birth and Youth (Poems 232- 311 ). 

The goddess tells the peys of the birth and the youth of prince Abhayan. At the end of the chapter 
a pey from the Kalinga country comes and tells them about the Kalinga war. 
Narrators: Anangu and the Kalinga pey.  

232. The goddess said, 
"Our king fought in Lanka and destroyed it
and he also defeated all his enemies in the Bharatha war 
and conquered all lands.
He was born as king Vijayadharan 
and carried a shining wheel 
to rule all the lands. Listen to what I say.

233. “Once when the gods were in trouble,
they went to Vishnu and asked him for help.
Vishnu was born to Vasudeva and Devaki
and all the three worlds praised him.

234. “Just like Vishnu, born on a banian leaf, 
the Chola baby prince was born from the auspicious womb of Ammangai,
the daughter of Rajendra Chola, 
the king of the sun dynasty that conquers its enemies,
and the queen of Rājarāja Narendra, 
the king of the moon dynasty that takes away the darkness.

235. “When the baby was born, 
the thunthumi drums sounded loud from the sky, 
They proclaimed, ‘The earth will become heaven
and the Vedas will be recited always.’

236. “When the baby prince was born 
rain fell like showers of flowers.
The Chola queen, wife of Gangai konda Cholan,
took her grandson, her daughter’s son, 
in her royal golden lotus-hands.

237. “When the Chola queen saw 
the marks on her grandson’s body 
that indicated that he would protect the earth,
she knew that he would become 
the heir of the sun dynasty and rule the Chola kingdom.

238. “The kings of the lunar dynasty said, 
‘This great one, the young child
was born in our dynasty to brighten it.’
The kings of the solar dynasty said, 
‘This great one will be the emperor of our dynasty.’
They both rejoiced thinking 
it was the result of their tapas 
that they were given a wonderful child.

239. “The royal family thought 
‘This child is the god Vishnu himself, born to Vasudeva,
and he will take away the troubles of the earth goddess.” 
They made an auspicious aimpadaithali chain 
with five pendants in the form
of a bow, a conch, a sword, a wheel and a mace,
put that chain on him and rejoiced.

240. “The prince was like a tiger cub
raised by an angry father. 
He was like a matchless elephant cub 
embraced by the elephants of the eight directions.
As he began to walk
all virtuous and heroic deeds followed him
as if they too were learning to walk. 

241. “From the time the prince drank milk 
from his mother’s breast, 
he showed his grace to the world.
Even when he prattled, he sounded as if he were reciting 
the words of the Vedas and Manu. 
His words were clear and all 
understood them as his commands.

242. “The prince wore a sacred thread on his chest 
that shines like the divine wedding chain 
on the beautiful neck of Lakshmi 
seated on a lotus on Vishnu’s chest. 
He had his second birth 
and wore that shining thread on his strong chest. 

243. “The prince learned all the Vedas of Vishnu 
from sages again and again 
just as they were given to the king Mabali
when Vishnu came in the form of a Brahmin dwarf 
and took over the earth and the sky.

244. “The prince carried the goddess of heroism of  the Vindhya mountain on his arms
and tied his shining sword on his majestic waist. 
When the earth goddess saw this 
she knew that her life would soon flourish.

245. “As the prince learned to ride an elephant,
he claimed that just as Indra conquered all his enemies 
riding on Iravadam, his four-tusked elephant,
he would conquer his enemies 
riding on an elephant that has only two tusks.

246. “As the prince learned to ride a horse, he thought, 
‘The Sun god goes around the earth removing darkness
and riding on his seven horses every day 
but I will ride on my one strong horse 
and remove the afflictions of the earth.’

247. “As the prince learned to use the five weapons— 
wheel, conch, club, bow and sword—
that he kept from the time he was born, 
he thought, ‘I will go around the world 
with my weapons in all directions and conquer the kings.’
And even though he learned to use them skillfully, 
he was so strong that his flower-like hands did not suffer.

248. “It is not enough to say
that the prince had learned many arts. 
No, the only way to do justice to his talents 
is to say no other prince knows as many arts as he 
and there are no excellent arts on this earth 
that he did not learn.

249. “After the famous king Veerarajendra Cholan
had raised the tiger banner high
and made Abhayan the prince,
 Abhayan decided to travel in all directions
to fight with kings and take their lands.

250. “He attacked his enemies
and conquered them with all his weapons 
like a lion cub that attacks a rutting elephant, 
scoring its face with its sharp claws.

251. “Just like the sun that rides on his chariot 
yoked with horses that rises in the east 
and removes darkness, 
the Chola prince went to the northern lands 
riding on his horse and conquered heroic kings. 

252. “The prince rode on his elephant 
as large as a mountain,
fought with his enemies and conquered them 
in the city of Vairaharam where the battlefield burned,
filled with smoke,
like the three flying forts burnt by Shiva.
The enemy kings folded their hands
and bowed to the prince in the battlefield.

253. “The prince killed the horses of his enemies 
that were sent by them like a roaring ocean
and when enemy warriors came to fight with him
making an oath that they would prevail,
he piled their heads as high as a hill.

254. “The Chola prince
removed the evils of his land.  
He bent his bow-like eyebrows in anger
and fought in Chakkarakottam
the battlefield looked like the fort of Yama.

255. “In each land where the prince fought and conquered, 
the goddess of victory belonged to him 
and the enemy kings gave him horses, elephants
and wealth as tribute for his victory.

256. “On the battlefield where the prince fought,
he conquered his enemies so quickly 
that the eyes of the enemy kings did not become red
and the legs of the retreating kings did not become red.
Only his spear became red,
and his fame spread everywhere.

257. “When the matchless prince Abhayan 
went to the northern land riding on his horse to fight, 
the king of kings Veerarajendran died
and went to world of the gods as their king.
The prince returned to his country in the south
and now I (Anangu) will tell what happened.

258-260. “When the Chola country lost their king Veerarajendran,
the country became disorderly.
The Brahmins did not perform their sacrifices.
The laws of Manu were not followed.
The six paths of the shastras—
astrology, literature, grammar, 
the yugas, dance and the arts and prosody—
all were abandoned.
The recitation of the Vedas was not heard.
Castes did not follow their rules.
People did not follow moral paths and fought always. 
Pujas at the temple were not done regularly.
The women were not faithful.
All order in the country vanished.

261. “When the darkness of famine spread 
everywhere in the Chola country,
the prince returned to the south
to protect that land 
like the bright sun that rises 
from the roaring ocean.

262. “The prince took over the Chola land, 
protected it and made it flourish, 
bringing the country back to an orderly state.

263. “As sages bathed the prince in holy water
from all the four oceans, 
the four Vedas and the three worlds, 
praised him.

264. “As sages crowned the prince, 
many kings, wearing sounding anklets on their feet, 
threw arugam grass on his head and praised him.
From then on the good laws of Manu 
were followed everywhere.

265. “When the sages crowned the prince
with a shining crown studded with precious jewels
according to tradition,
crops flourished in the country
and all its citizens performed their duties well.

266. “When our king raised his tiger banner 
and claimed that the Chola country 
belonged only to him and no one else,
the Chola citizens celebrated festivals for the gods 
and raised the tiger flag in all the temples.

267. The royal umbrella of the Chola king, 
studded with pearls, spread bright light like the moon, 
and removed poverty everywhere. 
Many kings folding their hands stood around our king
wearing sounding anklets on their feet. 

268. “When the prince became our king, 
the hills in the Chola land 
shone like the Himalayas where Shiva stays 
and his royal white umbrella
protected the people, providing them cool shade.

269. “When the prince became our king,
all troubles and poverty left the Chola land
and his fame spread like the milky ocean 
where Vishnu sleeps.

270. “When the prince became our king, 
people everywhere flourished
and followed the Vedas.
The Chera kings worshiped the feet of our king, 
and the Pandiyan kings ran 
and hid on islands in the ocean.

271. “When the prince became our king, 
his hands graciously poured out wealth 
like rain to sages reciting mantras with sacrificial fire,
 that brought abundant rain everywhere.

272. “When the prince became our king,
poets carried the wealth that he presented to them,
bulls carried the tribute that enemy kings gave
and his feet were surrounded with gifts 
that friendly kings gave,
while his shoulders carried the burden of the world.

273. “After the prince became our king, 
only his cendu weapon bent 
when he fought with the kings of Himalayas. 
He planted the Chola banner of a tiger 
with shining fire-like eyes and sharp claws, 
and his royal scepter that gives justice never bent. 

274. “In the Chola kingdom, 
no chains that took away people’s liberty 
were found except for two—
the chains on the feet of enemy kings
 in the war and did not obey him
and the chain of sound that adorns Tamil poems. 

275. “The Chola country became peaceful
and there was no sound of suffering or enmity. 
The only sound to be heard 
was the sweet sound of anklets on the lovely feet 
of beautiful women as beautiful as peacocks.

276. “Since there were no wars in his rule, 
the only conflicts that the Chola king enjoyed 
were boxing, debates between scholarly poets, 
cock fights and the battle between elephants 
that dripped ichor.

277. “The Chola monarch spent his time enjoying the arts, 
listening to poetry and music,
and loving his beloved queens. 
He followed the rules of Manu
and learned the Vedas to rule his country with justice.

The king goes hunting
The goddess continues to narrate

278. “Once when the king was hunting
on the banks of the Kaveri river 
that nurtures all the cool groves with its water,
the emperor said, ‘I wish to go to the banks of Pālāru 
and hunt, riding on my horse.’

279. “The king ordered, 
‘Beat the drums and announce to all to come to Pālāru.’
Hearing the announcement, 
a four-fold army gathered from all four directions. 
It was as if the whole world had entered into one city, 
as the sound of that army subdued 
the roaring sound of the waves of the ocean.

280. “The astrologers chose an auspicious day 
and a faultless time for the hunt to go to Pālāru.
The handsome king wore precious ornaments 
that made him even more handsome 
and readied himself to go for hunting 
on that auspicious day.

281. “When the king set out for hunting,
he gave gifts to the sages reciting the Vedas,
gold to poets, and refuge to kings needing his help.
His elephants were so happy to leave their sheds
and they shed ichor in their joy.

282. “The king rode on his elephant that shed ichor.
His victorious royal umbrella shone brightly 
like the sun rising on the eastern hills
and making the brightness of the moon fade. 
The white chowries, fanned at his sides,
looked like the moon spreading its light.

283. “When the king set out, 
the loud sound of the Valampuri conches,
the beautiful music of the Panilam conches 
and the loud music of the various instruments 
all sounded like the rainy season 
filled with roaring clouds.

284. “The sounds of the praise of the friendly kings,
and the divine sound of of theVedas recited by sages
spread everywhere on the earth
and made the people and the gods 
wonder which large ocean had made 
such a roaring sound.

285. “Ezhisai Vallabi, the queen, a beautiful singer, 
sang the songs that the Chola king composed
and made all the seven worlds happy 
with her sweet music
as she rode with the king on the elephant.

286. “Thyagavalli, the crown queen, 
decorated with golden ornaments 
and flower garlands rode with the king,
and she was surrounded by queens of other kings
who protected many countries.

287. “Many beautiful girls decorated with bracelets 
came riding on the female elephants, 
and it looked as if female elephants
were riding on female elephants. 
As the kings decorated with golden crowns 
came seated under their royal golden umbrellas
it looked as if many small crowns 
were covered with large crowns.

288. “As many kings rode on fighting elephants 
it looked as if elephants were riding on the elephants.
Lines of warriors came with their shining weapons 
following each other 
looking like one army following another. 

289. “As lines of elephants walked
carrying sounding drums 
it looked as if clouds were carrying roaring clouds. 
The clouds that moved above the raised flags
looked like they were also flags.

290. “Girls adorned with golden mekalai ornaments 
on their waists rode on chariots 
and looked like chariots riding on top of other chariots.
As all the vehicles moved, the dust that rose above
made it look as if the clouds of another sky 
was under the clouds in the sky. 

291. “The army of warriors rode 
on male and young female elephants
looked like a roaring ocean. 
It was as if king Abhayan and his army were building
the Sethubandanam bridge on the large ocean. 

292. “As palanquins studded with precious blue stones,
were carried by warriors in procession 
and royal umbrellas decorated with pearls, 
were held by warriors, 
it looked like the floods of the Ganges and Jamuna rivers 
flowing with abundant water.

293. “Thousands of flags with their emblems 
of fish, snakes, eagles, elephants, boar, lions, roosters,
bows and plows were raised
as the strong angry tiger flag of the Cholas
shone in the center.

294. “Beautiful women like blooming creepers 
with pretty thighs, necks, large round breasts, 
fish-like eyes, shining faces, 
and hair decorated with flowers 
walked softly, chattering sweetly 
and they resembled matchless peacocks 
decorated with lustrous diamond ornaments.

295. “As the women walked surrounding our king, 
their lovely thighs were like banana trunks,
their soft necks were like flourishing kamugu trees,
their breasts were like round young green coconuts,
their noses were like kumiz blossoms, 
their red mouths were like kumudam flowers, 
and their lovely eyes were like frolicing fish.

296. Because the women whose words are
as sweet as sugarcane juice
and whose bellies looked like curving waves
walked like swans surrounding the king, 
it looked as if our Chola king Jayadungan had created 
another Chola country flourishing with the Kaveri river
with its waves, swans and sugarcane plants. 

297. “As many kings riding on their elephants
followed our Chola king
it looked as if the mountains of the Chera country
had come with their kings 
to ask for refuge from the Chola king with a victorious spear.

298. “The drops of ichor that dripped 
from the tusks of the mountain-like Chola elephants 
looked like the pearls that the breeze scooped 
and brought from the Pandyan country 
when the Pandyan kings 
ran away because they feared Abhayan. 

299. “Our king Abhayan went
on pilgrimages from the south to the north 
worshipping and receiving the grace of Shiva
the three-eyed god, the lord of silver mountain, 
the dancer in Thillai. 
Then he reached the great Thiruvadigai city.

300. The king left Thiruvadigai, 
stopped in many places, enjoyed his journey
and when he reached the city of Kanchi,
filled with richness, 
many chieftains ruling
under their moon-like bright royal umbrellas
welcomed him and worshipped him.”

301. Even before the goddess narrated 
and finished telling of king Abhayan
as a baby, a prince and a king, 
a pey from the Kalinga war came there excited.
Even though his legs pulled him back,
the joy in his mind pushed him to the front. 

A pey saw the war in Kalilinga country came 
and told the other peys how much they can get to eat from 
the battlefield in the Kalinga country. (302-306)

302. The Kalinga pey said, 
“Blood, blood, everywhere there was the blood
of the Kalinga warriors.
Let us go, let us go to the battlefield there.
Your thin bodies will become fat.
Your thin bodies will become fat.

303. “Your empty stomachs will be fed. 
Come, Come, You will be happy.
O group of peys, get up, get up!
O group of peys, get up, get up!

304. “Listen, you seem so pitiful!
What can you do by staying here? You should be there.
There, the eagles that have strong wings 
and the vultures have eaten and their stomach are full.

305. “All your stomachs are not enough
to eat all the food that is there.
All the mouths that you have are not enough 
to eat all the food that is there.
If you think you have enough teeth
they are not enough either.
Whatever it is let us go and eat what we can.

306. “If you want to eat the flesh of the warriors 
piled up like a mountain
and drink the blood that flows like a wave-filled ocean, 
you should pray to Brahma
and ask him to make you very hungry.”

307. When the peys heard 
what the Kalinga Pey said,
they suddenly became fat and felt 
as if they had already eaten the meat of the corpses. 
They staggered and fell on the ground.

308. They ran to the pey, telling about the war, ,
and kissed its mouth.
They said,“We should break the teeth of the pey
that said we will not have any food and die.”

309. When the peys began to dance 
the thunangai dance in their joy, 
they did not even notice that 
their babies fell from their waists. 
They ran, danced and sang the Vallai song 
and called all the other peys to come and join.

310. They worshiped and praised the goddess, saying,
“Hail to our goddess. She told us about the war. 
They embraced the pey that described the dream of the war to them.

311. The goddess stopped the dance 
of the peys and called the pey 
that saw the battlefield in Parandalai city
and said, “Describe the war as it happened.”
----------

Chapter 11. Kālikku kūli Kūriyadu.  (poems 312- 403) 

Kuli, a servant pey of the Anangu says that the reason for the war with Kalingam is Tribute. 
Karunaharan went to Kalinga country with the Chola army to fight with the Kalinga king, Anandavarman. 
What the Kalinga king said and the advice of Kalinga minister and the fear of Kalinga people 
are described in this chapter.  

(The Kuli pey that came from Kalinga country continues to describe how the other kings came to 
give tribute to the Chola king Abhayan when he was seated with his queens and other kings and 
how the Kalinga king did not send his tribute. It continues to describe how Karunagaran, the army chief, 
offered to lead the army to go and fight with the Kalinga king and how he and the Chola army 
started to go to the war to the Kalinga country.)
Narrator: the servant pey Kuli that has returned from the Kalinga country after seeing the war.

Chola king stays in Kanchi city

312. A pey came from the Kalinga country and said,  
“Those who would describe the Kalinga war
need thousands of tongues
and those who wish to hear 
what had happened on the battlefield
where thousands of elephants died, 
need thousands of ears.

313. “ Even though it is not possible for one person to describe the war with one mouth,
I am a small person and will tell what I know.
O, goddess, show me your grace and listen.

314. “ One day in the golden city of Kanchi 
the clouds poured rain 
for seven and a half nāzihai,
showing generosity like the lotus hands 
of generous king Abhayan, the ruler of the whole world 
and gives abundant gold to all. 

315. The bright Sun with his thousand rays, 
saw the precious golden palace of the king
in the southwest, where there was 
a beautiful chitra mandapam and wondered, 
 “Is this a palace or is it really Meru mountain?”

316. The white royal umbrella that gave shade
and the pandal that was decorated with shining pearls,
looked like the sky where the bright moon rises 
in the midst of the gleaming stars. 

317. The two royal whisks 
that were fanned at the sides 
of the moon-like royal umbrella 
looked like two waves from the divine milky ocean 
that had come to serve the Vishnu like king. 

318. Our king planted the tiger banner 
on the golden mountain.
He came back seated on the royal throne 
and carrying the burden 
of the beautiful earth on his shoulders
looked like a chief of lions seated on the throne.

319. The goddess Parvathi rider on a lion,
the beautiful goddess Lakshmi 
and Saraswathi, the goddess of the many arts, 
were all with the king, the matchless chief of the earth 
that Adisesha carries. 

320. Just as the goddess of victory
and the beautiful goddess Lakshmi
stayed on the king’s shoulders without leaving him, 
his two queens worshipped him
and stayed on each side of him
as the king gave wealth to poor,
more than the karpaga tree that never stops giving.

321. The king was surrounded
by women as beautiful as apsarasas 
and they sing the four types of the famous ragas, 
dance skillfully and have acted in many dramas. 

322. People from the countries of Sudar and 
Magada
and bards sang auspicious songs 
and praised the king, saying,
“Your feet are like a pure golden crown 
and they protect the refuges, came to your country.

323. Excellent musicians played 
the veena, the yāzh, the flute and drums 
and bowed at the king’s feet and said,
 “We studied carefully and found out 
how to compose a hundred types of music.
Listen to them and give us your grace. 

324. “Even though the musicians,
as they played in front of the king,  
made no mistakes in rhythm and pitch, 
the learned king found fault in their playing.
Still he gave the bards gold and elephants
for their excellent music

325. The chieftains defeated by the Chola king 
came to his assembly on elephants
and served him by carrying his golden umbrellas,
and fanning him with white whisks.

326. As the king of kings was seated on the throne
like Indra the king of the gods,
the queens of the southern Pandyan kings 
and queens of other kings
served the Chola queens as their servants.

327. “As the chieftains of the Chola country
and the great kings of many other lands 
came and waited at the entrance
of the Chola palace to see the king,  
Karunagara Thondaimān, the chieftain of 
the Vandai country and other excellent ministers 
worshipped the king’s feet 
and seated themselves around him.

The Chola king receives tribute from kings

328. At that time, the king’s messenger 
came, worshipped the king and said, 
 “All the kings are waiting to give tribute to you.”
and all the kings approached the Chola king 
to give him tribute. 

The kings, the chieftains and the royal people
who stood around the king:

329. The chieftains, royal people, 
the southern Pandyan kings, the Chera king, 
the Kuvagar the kings of kollam,
the Sāvagar, Chethebar, Yādavar, 
Kannadar, Pallavar,
Kaithavar, Kādavar, Kāribar and Kosalar

330. And Gangar, Kārallar, 
Kavittar, Thumindar, Kadambar, 
Thulumbar, Vangar, Ilādar, Malādar, 
Virādar, Mayindar, Jayindar

331. And Singalar, Vangalar, Segunar, Sevanar, 
Siyanar, Aiyanar, Konganar, Kulingar, 
Akathiyar, Kucharar, Kachiyar,

332. And Vattavar, Mandirar, Māluvar,
Māgadar, Machar, Milechar, Suthirar,
Kuttar, Kudattar, Midakkar,
Thurukkar, Kurukkar, Thurukkar and others.”

333. Many kings bowed to the Chola king 
folding their hands, gave him 
large quantities of wealth, and said, 
“You granted us all cities 
and countries and we became kings.
We have brought the wealth that you desired.”

334. Then they said, “We brought you,
golden ornaments, elephants, 
camels, things for decorations, 
ancient crowns
and boxes to keep them all.

335. “We have brought fresh pearls 
that were just born in the ocean
and matchless golden chains
studded with precious jewels
and priceless necklaces.

336. “We have brought you piles of lustrous jewels, piles of gold, 
emerald ornaments that shine night and day,
and forehead ornaments for your queens. 
We have brought perfect cub elephants and bull elephants, 
and herbs that saves people’s lives.”

337. Many other kings wants the 
the grace of our emperor said,
 “We give you hundreds of elephants to ride on.
If there are any other kincould give even a little more than we do, 
we will match the gifts of those kings.”

338. The Chola emperor said to the kings 
came with tributes and bowed to his feet,
“O kings, do not be afraid, I will grant you refuge!”
and then he asked his messenger,
“Are there any other kings that did not give tribute?”

339. The messenger said, 
 “O king, all the kings brought their tribute
and bowed to your feet 
except the king of the northern Kalinga country. 
For the last two times, Anandavanman 
has not brought any tribute.’ 

340. All the kings in the assembly were terrified.
They stood up, trembling, and thought, 
“What will happen now?”
The emperor smiled with his beautiful coral-like mouth 
showing no anger on his face.
No one could understand his thoughts.

341. The emperor said, 
 “Even though the king of the Kalinga country 
is not a great king,
his country is protected by large mountains.
Let our warriors go right away, 
vanquish their fort-like mountains
and bring their elephants dripping with ichor 
that swarms with bees. Bring their king also.” 

342. When the emperor said this, 
the king of Vandai country, Karunakarathondaimān, 
the best of his dynasty praised in the sastras,
worshiped the feet of the emperor and said, 
“I will destroy Ezhu Kalingam.” 

343. The heroic Thondaimān thought 
 “I will go there and crush our enemies”
and he asked the king, “Give me your permission.”
The emperor raised the tiger banner 
and gave him his permission to go to war.

The Chola army goes to war  

344. When they saw the Chola warriors 
gathering to go to war 
and looking like the flood 
that will come at the end of the earth,
people said, “Will this army stir up the oceans 
and destroy them?
Will it break all the hills?
Will it break the neck of Adisesha, 
carrying the earth?”

345. When the army started, conches were blown, 
drums were beaten, war drums sounded,
wind instruments played loudly
and the noise of these instruments deafened 
the elephants of all directions.

346. The shade of the royal umbrellas,
the air from the whisks, 
and the swaying of the tiger flags
hid the bright light of the sun 
and spread darkness everywhere on the earth.

347. The burning fire from the eyes of the angry warriors,
the brightness of the their precious golden ornaments, 
and the sparks that came from their weapons
dispersed the darkness and spread light. 

348. The people saw the army wondered and said, 
 “Did all the hills of the world become elephants of the army?
Did all the winds become its horses?
Did all the clouds become its chariots?
Did the wave-tossed ocean become its warriors?” 

349. People wondered, 
“Is it because the world is small 
that the army looks so huge? 
Or is the army so great that the world looks small?
For the enemies of the Cholas, 
there is no place on earth to hide. 
The only place that they could go
is the wide sky.” 

350. “The people on the earth 
and heavenly dwellers saw the warriors 
and worried that they were losing patience 
and could not wait for the war to begin.
They thought, ‘If these warriors lose their patience,
won’t they just go off
and attack the lands on all directions?’

351. The Chola elephants large as mountains, 
dripped ichor like an ocean. 
Their angry eyes poured fire like clouds
flashing with the fire of lightning.
They had long tusks like crescent moons 
to split the bodies of enemy elephants and horses.
They trumpeted like roaring thunder with fire 
and like the sound that would occur at the end of the earth.

352. The Chola horses kicked the crowns of enemy kings
and crushed the pearls that spilled from them.
As they galloped the dust from the ground 
rose to the sky and joined the clouds. 
As they moved, they sounded like thunder 
from the sky falling on the ocean.
As they circled the roaring ocean swiftly they were like waves. 

353. As the Chola chariots rolled, their wheels 
broke the hard mounds on the ground
and they looked like they were flying over the battlefield.
They felt it would be a disgrace
if enemy horses could overtake them, 
They were decorated with beautiful lotus buds and flowers chiseled on them. 
They rolled over the bloody water in the battlefield and they rolled so fast 
that it seemed they had made a vow to measure the world. 

354. The bodies of the warriors were painted 
with their victories and duties
and marked by the wounds 
that they had received in the battle.
They would not retreat from the battlefield
even if they could get heaven and earth.
The heroic warriors thought their bodies were a burden. 
Even if they needed to give their life for fame, 
they would give them surely. 
All the warriors crowded together 
marched and thought the same way. 

355. The warriors with fiery eyes laughed angrily
and the gods heard that and trembled.
Hearing their laughter 
the elephants of all the directions were terrified.

356. The spittle that came from the horses’ mouths
when they jumped to the sky 
looked like the flood that arises at the end of the earth
and it was like the waves that float on a divine river.

357. The angry elephants 
dripping ichor from both their cheeks,
trumpeted like thunder, 
broke the stakes they were tied to
and ran to fight their enemies. 
The clouds that came down 
to take water from the wave-tossed ocean were terrified 
and rose again into the sky 
when they heard the sound of the elephants. 

358. The bees that swarmed everywhere
around the ichor of the elephants
were frightened and flew away
when they heard the loud noise of the chariots
that could circle the earth in a moment,
decorated with flags that swayed in the wind. 

359. When the army set forth, the weight of it
broke the spine of the earth.
The hills and the trees of the forest 
fell down and the rivers dried up without water.

360. When the army set forth, all the directions trembled
and all the seven oceans became silent.
Strong mountains split apart and thick dust spread everywhere.

361. When the army set forth, 
the dust that rose from the earth
split the clouds in the sky, filled them, 
took their water away, and made them dry up. 

362. The spittle from the mouths of the horses 
and the rain-like ichor from the decorated elephants
as large as mountains stopped the dust that rose
and made it settle to the earth.

363. When the sun rose in the morning 
the ocean-like army set out in the appointed direction
and as the warriors walked, the dust settled. 
Then when the sun set, they slept for the night. 
Every day they repeated this routine.

364. The king Abhayan decorated with an Atti garland ordered Karunaharan to invade 
the Kalinga country, and Karunaharan, as precious to the king as his own eyes, 
climbed on an elephant and set out to war.
To the king he was as precious as the discus to Vishnu. 

365. Karunaharan, the generous one, 
the chief of Thondai country, 
the chief of Vandaiyars and the Pallavas,
raised his white bull-banner to the shining sky
and mounted on his strong elephant to go to war. 

366. The chieftain Vānakovaraiyan rode his horse
to seize the elephants of the enemy kings,
and the Chola chief Mudikondacholan mounted
on a strong ornamented elephant and followed him.

367. Obeying the Chola king’s orders 
and wishing to conquer enemies,
Karunagaran, the king of the Pallava and Vandai lands,
mounted his elephant
that was decorated with shining ornaments 
and had a stately walk.
As he went to the war he was like a hungry tiger 
going to kill its prey. 

368. Karunaharan’s army crossed
the six rivers Pālaru, Kusaittalai, Ponmukari, 
Pazavāru, Kolli, and the beautiful Pennai river 
and continued on.

369. The army crossed the Vayalāru, 
the beautiful Mannāru, Peyalāru 
that waters so many fields,
the fertile Kundri that gives water like rain
and the wide Perāru 
that flows through many lands.

370. The army crossed 
the great Godāvari river, the cool Pampa river,
the Gayathri river that sings as it flows, 
the Gauthami river and many other rivers with cool banks,
filled with pure water. 

371. As it entered the Kalinga country
the army was like an ocean 
that rises at the end of the earth.
It burned and destroyed many cities 
and plundered the wealth of the country. 
When they saw the destruction of Kalinga country, 
even the gods trembled.

Description of the fear of the Kalinga people, the anger of Anandavarman, the Kalinga king 
and the advice of Engarayan, his minister. The Kalinga warriors go to war. (372 - 403)

372. The people of the Kalinga country 
were terrified and complained to the king.
They said, “The Chola army like an ocean 
has come from the south.
If the ocean rises, where can we go?
In the north there is Ganges river, hard to cross.
Where is our refuge? Where is our protection?
Which other king can help us now except our king?

373. “The walls of our fort are broken.
All our cities are burning.
Smoke is rising above our cities.
All our groves are dying. Our families are destroyed.
Now the only thing that we can see
is the enemy army that surrounds us.

374. “O king, even though we told you, you did not listen 
and did not give tribute to the heroic Abhayan, 
the matchless king on the earth. 
Now he has sent his army to make you 
pay him the tribute he asked.”

375. The people trembled, 
talking incoherently before the king. 
Their clothes became loose in fear
and they fell at the feet of their protector.

376. When Anandavanman the king of the Kalinga country 
heard his people his eyes reddened with anger.
He sighed, sweated, and clapped his hands in rage.
He did not realize the danger the war posed for his country. 

377. Anandavanman spoke to his people, 
 “You worry about king Abhayan,  
seated under his beautiful royal umbrella
and riding an elephant whose ichor is drunk by bees. 
Do you think I am so weak that I cannot oppose his army?’
Angrily, the king of Kalinga 
shook his wide shoulders and laughed loudly.”

He said, 
378. “Our Kalinga land is surrounded 
and protected by forests, hills and oceans. 
It seems the Chola army is ignorant of the strong defenses of our land.”

The advice of the minister Engarayan advice to the Kalinga king. 

379. When the king Anandavanman had said this, 
his minister, Engarāyan, the minister said,
“Listen, I have something to say to you.

380. “Even if it makes a king angry,
it is the duty of a minister to advise him properly. 
He must not be silent and not tell
the king what is right.

381. “It is not necessary for Jayadharan, the Chola king, 
to come to fight with his enemies himself, 
because his heroic army is enough to oppose
and conquer his enemies’ lands.

382. “Haven’t you heard
that when the Chola army came to fight 
with the five Pandyans, 
they were all destroyed?

383. “Haven’t you heard
that when the Chola king’s army 
was only preparing to go fight with the Cheras, 
the Chera army retreated and ran away?

384. “Didn’t the Chola army destroy Vizinyam city 
and conquer Kandalur Sālai because it is so strong?

385. “Isn’t true that the king of the Vattar country
was defeated when he came with his army 
and opposed the Chola army?

386. “O, king, don’t you know
how much the people suffered 
when the Chola king’s army massed,
went and fought in the city of Alathi? 

387. “Didn’t the captains of the Chola army 
capture a thousand elephants
when they fought in the city of Navilai? 

388. “How can I count the kings
who suffered and lost their kingdoms
when the Chola army 
fought and conquered them?

389. “Karunaharan is like Vishnu’s discus 
for the king, strong as Vishnu,
has come with his army. 
If you go and fight with Karunaharan 
you will discover how weak your arms are.

390. “Though you are angry with me today,
you will think of my advice 
when you stand before the Chola army 
on the battlefield.”

The Kalinga King Anandavarman tells Engarayan. 

391. Upon hearing Engarayan’s advice
King Anandavanman said angrily, 
 “Even the gods tremble to speak in front of me.
Haven’t you noticed
that my arms, strong as mountains, are growing thin 
because for so long there has been no war?

392. “You have advised me 
because that is your duty as a minister.
I will not hurt you, 
but are you giving me advice only to make me weak? 
Does a young lion cub that lives in a cave
come to fight with an elephant 
because he thinks it is easy?

393. “You and other royal people 
do not know my strength,
yet you have advised me without understanding 
the strength of my arms and sword.
Do you say this because you are ignorant?
Do you think it is easy for the Chola army to defeat me
just because they think it is easy?

394. “I will go to the battlefield with our armies 
of elephants, horses, chariots and strong warriors, 
stand before the army sent by the Chola king Kuladungan
and oppose it. O, courageous warriors!
Decorate our strong elephants and horses
and ornament our numerous chariots.
Let us go to the battlefield! On to the battlefield!
You should realize that it is your good fortune 
that you can fight with your enemies. 
On to the battlefield!”

The Kalinga army goes to war.

395. When the army started, 
the sound of it echoed
through all seven parts of the Kalinga country. 
It was as if the sound of the seven oceans 
in all the directions were combined together.

396. The long-tusked elephants, as large as mountains, 
went dripping ichor and they were like the clouds
that take water from the deep oceans
and then pour rain. The long-faced horses
galloped dripping spittle from their mouths
that was like the rolling waves of the ocean.

397. As the Kalinga army started to move like an ocean,
its decorated royal umbrellas and royal fans
looked like the foam of the ocean’s waves 
and as they swayed, the many royal banners 
looked like shining fish frolicking in it.

398. The angry army looked like an ocean
that was going to swallow 
the whole earth at the end of the world. 
As the army moved, the spears, swords and other weapons
made a tumult as they crashed together.

399. As the chariots rolled swiftly yoked to galloping horses, 
they looked like ships speeding as they float on the ocean.
The young warriors,
not caring for death if they could receive fame,
marched like the killing sharks in the ocean.

400. When the warriors marched, 
the trees immediately cracked and fell,
the forest trees on the way split into pieces,
the cool waterfalls grew hot
and the large mountains were destroyed and shattered.

401. When the young Kalinga warriors, 
their anger like the fire at the end of the earth, 
marched wearing heroic anklets, 
many drums resounded sounding like the large roaring ocean.

402. People could not tell one warrior from the next 
because they marched so close to each other
and it was as if each body had entered into the next one 
and there were no space between them.

403. A huge throng of Kalinga warriors,
come to oppose the army of the Chola king Manubaran, 
covered the battlefield
looking like tigers searching for food.
They screamed, “Let us take the lives of our enemies, 
Let us take their lives!”
---------
 
Chapter 12. Por Padiyadu. The song of the War. (Poems 404- 471)

The pey that came from the Kalinga country continued describing the war in Kalinga country. 
This chapter describes the fight between the Chola and Kalinga warriors and the appearance 
of the battlefield.

The armies oppose each other on the battlefield

404. Both armies, shouting louder than the ocean, 
said, “Let us start fighting, let us start fighting.
Warriors on horses, forward!
Warriors on elephants, forward!”
The sound of the armies grew louder and louder.

405. The people of the earth were deafened 
by the loud noise that the warriors made on the battlefield. 
They were terrified when they saw 
the arrows issuing swiftly from the archers’ bows
and splitting things everywhere.

406. As they fought with each other, the armies 
looked like two oceans crashing together, 
and the horses on each side
looked like rolling waves opposing each other. 

407. The rutting elephants that fought 
looked like large hills fighting with each other
and the chariots that clashed
looked like clouds opposing each other.

408. The warriors fighting
looked like tigers. 
The kings opposing each other looked like battling lions.

409. The warriors’ fire-like eyes streamed anger
like the flashing of lightning 
and their bent bows sounded like thunder 
and the arrows that issued from them 
looked like pouring rain.

410. The blood flowing on the battlefield 
was like a red river in flood, 
the white royal umbrellas that floated on the blood
were like foam of the river, 
and the bodies of the elephants that were cut down
and piled up were like the banks on both sides
of that bloody river. 

411. The tusks of the mountainous elephants 
clashed with each other
and the sparks of fire that rose from them 
burned the flags that flew above.

412. As the flags burned, 
the smoke that rose from them
seemed to make a line of flags across the sky,
and this happened before anyone even realized
there was a fire.

413. Dark-colored ichor fell 
on both sides of the elephants
and it blackened their tusks 
so they looked as if 
they had three black trunks.

414. As they fought, the elephants, 
strong and large as mountains, 
pulled each other’s trunks.
It looked like as if a rope 
was tangled between their tusks
as they tried to pull. 

415. The mass of horses on the battlefield, 
their strength so great 
that they could destroy the enemy army, 
looked like the coral-colored fire at the end of the earth
as it rages in the strong wind and burns the whole world. 

416. Some warriors did not wish to oppose the horses
that came to fight in front of them. 
They stood in front of the elephants 
and fought with them 
and they felt as if they were embracing
their beloved women decorated with pearls. 

417. When some warriors fought 
with elephants and broke their tusks,
the scars that the tusks made on their chests
looked like marks from the breasts
of the goddess of victory, smeared with sandal paste.

418. When some warriors riding on their horses
fought with elephants and killed them,
the precious pearls that fell from the elephants’ tusks
could be strung as a pearl chain 
to decorate the goddess of victory’s breasts 
smeared with sandal paste.

419. The battlefield where the warriors were arrayed 
and fought
looked like an ocean with its waves. 
The matchless arrows that they shot 
started fires and made the battlefield look
like a burning forest of bamboo.

420. The arrows that the warriors shot 
struck one another and made fire and smoke.
The sound as the arrows left their bows 
was like the crackle when a bamboo forest burns.

421. As enemy archers shot their arrows, 
some opposing warriors riding towards them on horses 
swiftly cut them in half with swords, 
but even though the archers were killed,
one part of them continued to shoot 
at the warriors on horses.

422. Even though half of the bodies of archers
was destroyed, the other halves continued to shoot arrows and 
they cut off the heads and legs of the warriors 
as they came to do battle on horses. 
People saw this, were amazed and exclaimed, 
“What great skill! What rare talent!” 

423. Even though their legs and heads were cut off,
some warriors mounted on horses
took in their hands the sharp, long arrows
shot at them by the archers
and shot them back and killed them.

424. Some warriors shot their arrows only by guessing 
where their enemy warriors might be
and split their bodies in two parts
so that their pride would be destroyed.
It was as if they shot their arrows 
just by guessing without knowing 
whether they were targeting the right thing. 

425. Some Chola warriors shot their arrows
and the Kalinga warriors stopped them with their shields
using them as barriers to protect themselves.

426. When some warriors shot 
their unceasing stream of arrows, 
the enemy warriors blocked them with their shields 
and as they were pierced, the shields 
looked like walls with small holes. 

427. As the heroic warriors
pierced their enemies’ bodies with their swords, 
those bodies with swords embedded in them
looked like plows that split the earth.

428. The trunks of elephants were cut off 
and fell, curling on the ground,
and with sharp arrows piercing them, 
they looked like wheels with spokes. 	

429. The pearls that fell 
from the heads of the strong elephants
looked like the rice that manly grooms pour
on the heads of their brides. 

430. The bodies of warriors lying on the ground 
with their fallen shields near them 
looked like axles and the wheels of a chariot 
fallen together. 

431. The discuses thrown by the enthusiastic warriors 
and the clubs that their enemies threw to stop them
stuck together and looked like axes. 

432. The headless bodies of some warriors 
danced on the battlefield 
as a happy group of peys stood in front of them
looking like dance masters 
standing in front of dancers and directing them.

433. Some of the dead warriors’ camels, elephants 
and long-tailed horses would not leave the battlefield. 
They stayed there even after the war was over
as if they wanted the war to start again. 

434. As trumpeting elephants were killed
they fell into the river of blood and floated
looking like clouds that come down
to scoop up water from the roaring ocean.

435. Some warriors cut off the trunks of elephants
and, carrying them on their shoulders, 
looked like musicians playing wind instruments
and supporting them with their shoulders. 

436. Some warriors in the war,
lacking arrows to shoot at their enemies, 
pulled the arrows from their chests
without hesitation and shot them back. 

437. Some warriors goaded their horses with their spears 
and then raised them, going around the battlefield 
and carrying them as if they were banners 
raised for the goddess of victory.

438. Some warriors  lost both of their legs
and they threw one of their legs at the elephants 
that were charging and attacking them 
and kept their other leg to throw
as a weapon when they needed it.

439. Some of the warriors opposed,
each other and killed with their swords. 
As both of them fell on the ground, 
warriors on both sides praised them noisily. 

440. Some warriors mounted their elephants
and cut off the heads of their enemies,
and the heads that fell on the ground shouted
at the own elephants, “Attack our enemies!”

441. Some warriors, 
wanting to fight the horses that came to attack them,
did not have weapons of their own 
and pulled weapons from the dead elephants 
and threw them at the horses.

442. Some warriors hit attacking elephants 
on their foreheads as the elephants tried to gore their chests.
The warriors riding on the elephants shouted, 
“These are our own elephants!” 
and when they heard those shouts,
the attacking warriors were ashamed
and did not throw their weapons at the them.

Karunagaran, the army chief, comes to the battlefield.

443. Karunagaran, praised by the whole world, 
the chief of the land of the Vandaiyars
and a minister of the Chola king,
came to the battlefield to fight riding on his elephant
that had one trunk and two tusks. 

444. Karunagaran’s army sent by the Chola king 
and the army of seven parts of the Kalinga country
both arrayed themselves on the field 
and fought ferociously,
wishing to conquer their enemies and get victory.

445. The gods from heaven came to see that terrible war
where both armies were arrayed and fought,
rutting elephants were cut in pieces,
and many horses were killed
and many chariots were destroyed. 

446. The heads of the warriors 
whose bodies were cut in pieces 
were piled up like a mountain on the ground 
and their blood flowed like a roaring ocean 
and their intestines floated on the blood.

447. Blood flowed in all directions like waves of the ocean 
as confusion spread on the battlefield
where many chariots were destroyed.
Eagles, foxes and crows ate the flesh 
of the elephants and horses 
that were killed in the battlefield. 

Anandavarman, the Kalinga king and his people, defeated, run and hide

448. The king of the seven Kalinga lands,
Anandavanman, who had said that he would come 
with a thousand strong mountain-like rutting elephants 
to oppose his enemies, could not prevail.?
He lost his manliness and ran away to hide.

449. Where did the Kalinga king hide?
In the caves that only he knew?
Under the earth where no one could find him? 
In thick forests?
No one knew where he had hidden himself.

450. The people from all seven parts of the Kalinga country 
saw the battle and scattered in fear.
Terrified, they thought,
 “What is this? Is it a magic war?
Is it fire? Is it the time when Yama comes?
Is it end of the earth?”

451. When the Kalinga warriors scattered, 
some jumped into the ocean,
some hid behind angry elephants,
some, searching for ways to escape, hid in caves,
some hid in the bushes.
They could not even follow one another.

452. As they ran, some Kalinga warriors
saw their own shadow
and thought it was someone chasing them. 
Terrified, they bowed to their shadow, trembling, 
and said, “You are a Tamil, you are a Tamil,
give me refuge, give me refuge!”

453. The Kalinga warriors hid in dark caves and said, 
“The Chola elephants that the king Vanavan sent 
trumpet like thunder roaring in the clouds and fight angrily. 
We only saved ourselves today
because we showed our backs and ran away!”

454. When the matchless Karunagaran
destroyed the Kalinga country, the enemy warriors ran away
wearing just one piece of cloth around their waists.

455. When the Kalinga warriors ran, 
the Chola warriors chased them angrily
and took their elephants and horses. 
No one could count the elephants and horses
that the Chola warriors took.

456. No one could count the elephants
that were wounded on the field
and shed blood mixed with ichor 
that swarmed with bees and vultures.

457. Many elephants went mad 
and threw their drivers.
As they wandered around out of control,
some warriors caught them and tied them up.

458. The Chola warriors imprisoned many kings 
along with their elephants. 
They tied kings and elephants together so that 
they looked like tigers and mountains bound together. 

459. No one could count the strong galloping horses,
the chariots, the camels, the nine types of precious stones,
the women and all the wealth
that the Chola warriors took from the battlefield.

460. Karunagaran, the army chief of king Abhayan, said, 
 “Let us take all the wealth with us 
along with the king of the seven parts of Kalinga country. 
Go, find out where the king of Kalinga 
has hidden himself.”

461. As soon as the captain gave them these orders,
an ocean of innumerable spies 
went immediately and searched for the Kalinga king 
in mountains, forests and thickets. 

462. Some warriors said, “We cannot find any hint 
of where the Kalinga king might be hidden 
and so we are continuing to search for him. 
We did see his strong army with their weapons
on the top of a mountain, 
so numerous that no one could count them.”

463. The Chola warriors thought, “No mountain peak, 
no ocean and no forests can protect the Kalinga warriors.”
They sailed around the ocean, climbed mountains all day
and in the evening, at sunset, 
they reached the top of a mountain.

464. The Chola warriors, holding their bows and spears,
stood around until dawn on the top of the mountain
surrounding it like a fence.
They looked like the men that guard boars
that have been locked in a shed 
after being hunted down by king Abhayan,
riding his elephant that never fails in his hunting. 

465. The people, seeing the mountain
that was covered with the blood of enemies 
flowing like a river, exclaimed, 
“How could this mountain have become red like this?
Is this the same mountain where the sun rises?”

466. Many of the Kalinga warriors 
pulled out their hair and took off their clothes 
and,wearing only a small loincloth, 
told the Chola warriors, “We are Jains!”
That is how they disgraced their country and escaped.

467. Many Kalinga warriors 
took the strings from their bows and wore them like sacred threads. 
They lied to the Chola warriors and said, 
“We went to bathe in the Ganges
but because of our fate you caught us. We are not hiding.”
That is how they failed to attack their enemies and escaped.

468. Many Kalinga warriors and others were bald, 
wore orange clothes, soaked in blood, 
and escaped by lying to the Chola warriors, saying, 
“Don’t you see that we are Buddhist monks
wearing saffron robes?”

469. When many Kalinga warriors and others
were caught by the Chola warriors, 
they rang the bells of their elephants, 
sang and escaped, saying, 
“We are from the Telugu country. 
We saw this battlefield with so much death 
and were terrified.
Don’t you see that we are Panars and your slaves?”

470. The only Kalinga warriors to be seen were the paintings on the walls
of warriors from the seven parts of the Kalinga country.
The Chola warriors had searched out all their enemies,
caught them and killed them. None could escape.

471. The king of the Vandaiyar dynasty, 
Karunagaran from the Thondai country,
conquered the Kalinga country that is surrounded by the sea
and planted a pillar of victory there.
He captured rutting elephants, 
strong horses and great wealth 
and gave them to king Abhayan with a bright sword.
He bowed to the king and received his grace. (404 -471)
-----------
 
Chapter 13. Kalam padiyadu. The song of the battlefield (Poems 472- 502)

The author, goddess and peys describe the battlefield after the war. 

472. When they speak of great wars, 
men have always described the wars 
between Murugan and Surapadman in the Skandapurana, 
Rama and Ravana in the Ramayana,
the Pandavas and Kauravas in the Mahabharatha, 
but the battle between Karunagaran and Anandavanman
was so terrible that in the future men will forget those wars
and remember only that Kalinga war.

473. When one of the peys
asked the goddess, “O goddess,
the battlefield is the place of Yama.
Come quickly and see it!”
the goddess, the beloved of Siva,
sweet as nectar to him whose neck is dark
approached the battlefield with the peys. 

474. The goddess, decorated with precious jewels,
went with the peys, saw the terrible battlefield,
was amazed and told her group of Alahais. 
“What a terrible battlefield!”

The goddess shows the battlefield to Alahais

475. “See the bodies of the elephants 
covered with wounds 
floating on the river of blood one after another
like ships that float one behind the other.
See them, see them!

476. “See those horses that are spread over the battlefield.
They have fallen into the fat and cannot get up. 
The heavy saddles on their backs slip down 
and they look like pieces of wood joined together 
to dam the river of blood. See them, see them!

477. “See the flocks of small birds 
and large vultures
that eat the flesh of the warriors 
whose happy faces are like blooming lotuses,  
like those great ones who rejoice
when they can feed equally the rich and poor.
See those warriors, see those warriors! 

478. “See the troops of foxes 
staying by the warriors’ bodies 
and do not leave them until they die. 
They are like the poor 
who stay near miserly men hoping to get help from them 
but who get nothing even after those misers die.
See those foxes, see those foxes!

479. “See the bees that swarm around the strong elephants
whose ichor pours out like rain
and leave the elephants when their ichor stops. 
They fly to the flowers that are showered down by the gods
for the victory of Karunagaran.
These bees are like the women desiring wealth 
happy living with rich men 
but leaving them when they become poor. 
See those bees, see those bees!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

480. “See the elephants that fell and float 
on the river of blood on the battlefield. 
See how the flags of the kings have fallen 
on the elephants so they both float together
as if the flags were chaste women who enter the fire with the bodies of their husbands.
See that, see that!

481. “See those women 
searching for the bodies of their husbands 
so that they could die with them
and asked the guards of the goddess and the goddess’s Idahinis, 
‘Where are the bodies of our husbands?”
See them, see them!

482. “See a wife suffering
when she sees her husband lying
with closed lips and asks him, 
‘Were your lips wounded?
Is that why they are closed?’
Her life is slowly ebbing away.
See that woman! See that woman!

483. “See the woman giving up her life
with her husband as she holds his body 
before the earth goddess and embraces him
while the heavenly women welcome his soul.
See that woman, see that woman!

484. “See the woman asking the goddess Bhairavi, 
‘Where is the sword 
that my husband had in his strong hands?
Where is his beautiful chest?
Where are his heroic shoulders 
that never retreat in war?’
See that woman, see that woman!

485. “See the blood that gushes from the warriors’ wounds 
as they ride on galloping horses and fight each other,
see how it splashes and touches the sky 
and makes the dark clouds red. 
See that, see that!

486. “See how the dark crows 
come to eat the white fat on the battlefield
and, plunging into it, are covered and became white. 
No one has ever seen dark crows becoming white 
in this world. See that strange scene now!

487. “See how the battlefield looks like a lotus pond
as broken pieces from the decorations of the chariots
are like lotus buds, the blood that flows is like water
and the hair of warriors is like moss.
See that lotus pond, see that lotus pond!

488. “See the bodies of the warriors 
pierced by arrows and shining spears,
see how they stand without falling to the earth 
so they look like the bamboo poles
that stand upright as dancers walk across
the tightrope tied between them. 
See those bodies, see those bodies!

489. “See how the vultures 
suffer as they fly everywhere around the field,
see how they have been wounded by the spears
protruding from the bodies of the warriors 
as they ate their flesh.
See those vultures, see those vultures! 

490. “The captains of the armies 
standing in the front fought fiercely 
and gave up their lives to protect
other warriors standing behind them. 
See how they did their duty 
and thereby gave thanks to their king. 

491. “Some warriors,
riding on the elephants against each other, 
cut off their enemies’ heads and threw them up in the air
making them look like ammanai balls
thrown by the goddess of victory as she plays. 
See those ammanai balls, see those ammanai balls!

492. “Look at the warriors, impossible to count.
They ride to heaven on chariots
that descend from the sky to them. 
Will there ever be a larger crowd of warriors 
in the shining sky than these?
See how they go to heaven, 
see how they go to heaven!

493. “Look at the blood 
that pours from the warriors’ bodies
mixed with the ichor of elephants
and the spittle from the mouths of horses. 
It spreads like an ocean 
whose waves are white as a chowry.
Look at that ocean of blood, 
look at that ocean of blood!

494. “Jayadharan, the Chola king 
is like Rama who  fought with the king of Lanka.
See the corpses of the elephants 
piled up like mountains.
They are like the stone bridge 
that was constructed by the monkeys for Rama. 
See those elephants, see those elephants! 

495. “See how the warriors put their hands up 
to stop the arrows of an excellent warrior, saying,
‘How did he learn to shoot like this?’
as his arrows penetrate the shields and the armor
that covers the chests of his enemies and kill them all.
See those warriors! See those warriors.

496. “See the souls of the warriors that go to heaven
on sky chariots like gods 
and see the warriors lying on the battlefield 
looking like gods because their faces are joyful
and their eyes do not blink.
See those bodies, see those bodies! 

497. “Look at the the large elephants 
whose tusks are like crescent moons.
See how they are cut in two and lie on the ground 
making the battlefield look
like the shop of an blacksmith spread with tools.

498. “See the warriors lying 
on the ground of the battlefield
holding the spears that struck their chests
so they look like musicians 
playing long wind instruments.
See those warriors, see those warriors!

499. “See the warriors on chariots
taking in their hands the long spears 
that have pierced their chests.
As they stand on their chariots
they look like rowers with  their oars
as they sail on an ocean of blood.
See those warriors, see those warriors!

500. “See how an eagle that was flying in the wide sky
was hit by an arrow and has fallen.
It holds in its beak a large arrow
as it floats in the river of blood and fat.
See that eagle, see that eagle!

501. “The bhudam with a large belly
that ate the chief of all the armies 
and carries many horses on his head
looks like an incomparable dark cloud as he walks
and moves like a pregnant woman. 
See that bhudam, see that bhudam!

502. “See the warriors 
riding on elephants as large as mountains.
They were so worried that they might
be wounded in their backs
that they stood in front of their enemies,
were hit in the chest and fell to the ground. 
See those warriors. See those warriors!”
------------
 
Chapter 14. Kuzh aduthal. The song of cooking the porridge  (Poems 503-596 )

503. The goddess showed her grace to the alahais and said, 
“I cannot show and tell everything 
that happened in the battlefield. 
The blood of the elephants combined with their ichor 
and flowed like a river whose flood is stopped by a dam.
Now, you may all plunge into this river of blood,
cook porridge and worship the gods.”

The peys says,

504. “O short modi, 
you wear a long garland made of fat,
you plunge and play in the river of blood,
you have sharp teeth, 
you are a tricky one,
and you want to eat goats, 
You with a pot belly,
come to make porridge,
come to make porridge.

505 “Break the white tusks of the elephant
for brushing your teeth.
Take the chest bone of dead elephants
for cleaning your tongue.

506. “Use sharp arrows to clean your fingernails.
Take the ichor of the strong elephants
and use it as oil to comb your hair.

507. “Use white brains for shampoo
to remove the oil from your hair.
Join together, jump into the pool of blood,
swim and play.

508. “In the pool of blood
there are rods, arrows and spears
and many other weapons.
Do not go into it and hurt yourselves.
Stay near the bank and bathe.

509. “Do not swim for a long time
in the deep pool of blood.
Come out and take the fat of the Kalinga warriors,
make it into a garment and wear it.

510. “Take the ornaments on the tusks 
of the rutting elephants
and wear them on your wrists as bangles
studded with precious jewels. 
Take the stirrups from the horses
as they eat grass and wear them on your feet
as golden anklets studded with pearls.

511. “Take the hoops that the warriors
have thrown in the terrible war, 
stretch them as large as you need,
and make ear ornaments to decorate your ears.

512. “Take the trunks of huge elephants 
that are as tall as palmyra trees  
and tie them on your hands 
as auspicious cords to protect you. 
Take two drums, put a long rod between them
and wear them as an ear ring. 

513. “Take the saddles from the horses
that fell to the earth and wear them as ornaments for your arms.
Take the conches blown by the warriors, 
string them together and wear them as pearl necklaces.

514. “Take the eyeballs of the angry warriors
who fought and died in the war
and the beautiful pearls 
fallen from the heads of elephants,
string them together using nerves as threads 
and wear them as beautiful chains.

515. “We could find many other things
to wear as ornaments to adorn ourselves,
but it is getting late. We will be hungry,
our stomachs will hurt and we will be upset.
Come let us cook the porridge and eat.

516. “Let us make a pandal with the wings of strong vultures 
and the ears of elephants as large as mountains,
and let us make a kitchen under the pandal
and begin to cook.

517. “Smear the floor 
with the ichor of rutting elephants, 
make kolams with a powder of pearls
fallen from elephants’ heads
and use the heads of the elephants
that died in the war as stoves
and start cooking.

518. “Take the stomach of the elephants 
whose heads, legs and intestines
have all been cut off in the battle 
by warriors with their victorious swords 
and use them as pots on the stoves to cook.

519. “For cool white yogurt,
mix together the brains of the warriors
and for red yogurt use their flesh. 
Put them in all the pots on the stoves.

520. “For water, pour the blood of the horses
into the pots that were made 
of the stomachs of elephants 
killed in the war. 

521. “For garlic use the white teeth of the horses
that fell on the field 
and for salt for the porridge
add the nails of the warriors who died in battle.

522. “Even though the warriors’ souls 
went to heaven in the sky, the fiery eyes of their bodies 
have not lost their fury and are still red.
Use them as fire for the stoves.

523. “Collect the weapons—
spears, swords, arrows and sticks— 
use them for firewood 
and start the fire. 

524. “Use the teeth that were broken and fell out
when the Kalinga warriors 
bit stones in the battle. 
Crush them and use them for rice 
when you cook.

525. “First taste the rice-teeth
you will use for the porridge 
and then use the drums
that are broken and soundless 
as mortars to pound the rice.

526. “Put the teeth-rice into the drums 
and use the tusks of the dead elephants
for pestles to pound the rice 
singing, ‘chalukku, molukku.’

527. “Sing the praise of the goddess Durga.
She gave you corpses
and took away your hunger 
and the weakness of your big bodies.
Sing the praise of that great goddess as you pound the rice.

528. “The heroic Chola king,
rider on a galloping horse,
rules the country where the Kaviri river flows. 
He bears the burden of his country on his two shoulders,
relieving Adisesha of the burden of carrying the earth.
Sing and praise our king and pound the rice.

529. “Sing the praise of our king Abhayan. 
He holds a shining sword and fought in battles, 
conquered the Pandyan kings and defeated the Chera kings with his angry elephants.
Praise our king and pound the rice.

530. “Sing how the Chera kings, 
adorned with diamond-studded crowns,
and the Pandyan kings, 
adorned with beautiful crowns, 
bow to the great feet of our king.
Praise our king’s gentle feet and pound the rice.

531. “Sing the praise of the elephants 
that have fragrant ichor 
and bring tribute from the northern kings
to our king Abhayan with a long shining sword.

532. “Sing the praise of our learned Chola king
whose round umbrella covers all the lands surrounded by oceans
and whose flower-like feet are bowed to by enemies. 
Sing the praise of the strength of the bows
of our warriors and pound the rice.

533. “Sing and praise of the victorious 
royal umbrella of our king 
that protects the earth goddess always and pleases her. 
Sing the happiness of the people 
on the day when our king was born. 
Sing the praise of Kulothunga Chola and pound the rice.

534. “Sing and praise the prosperous cities of Vandai,
ancient Mallai and excellent Kanji. 
Sing and praise Karunagaran,
the great chieftain of the Pallava dynasty, 
and pound the rice.

535. “Sing the praise of Karunagara Thondaimān, 
the chief of Thondai Nadu, 
the conquerer of the Kalinga country 
who captured an army of elephants.
He is the cause for poets 
to praise our king, our protector,
in a Parani poem.
Sing and pound the rice.

536. “Sing how hundred of thousands of chieftains 
decorated with shining crowns
come at an auspicious time, 
bow and give tribute to our king 
and how the goddess with beautiful eyebrows 
gives her grace to all.
Praise our king and the goddess and pound the rice.

537. “Our excellent king Abhayan 
has only one crown, but the crowns of the kings
who bow to  his feet are hundreds of thousands.
Sing the praise of our king and pound the rice.

538. “The mountains where enemy kings ran
 and hid who do not pay tribute
or bow to our king with their crowned heads
are hundreds of thousands. 
Sing the praise of our king and pound the rice.

539. “Hundreds of thousands of kings
stand before the palace entrance of king Abhayan, 


defeated and suffer losing in the war with the Cholas. 
Sing and praise of our king and pound ice. 

539. “Hundreds of thousands of kings
suffer standing before the palace entrance
of the ministers of our king
who wears garlands of victory.
Sing and praise our king and pound rice. 

540. “The generous king Abhayan 
whose arms are adorned with garlands 
gives wealth to sages
to perform hundreds of thousands of sacrifices
so the earth may flourish with rain 
and those sacrifices never cease.
Sing and praise our victorious king and pound the rice.

541. “Adisesha’s thousand heads do not need 
to carry the burden of the earth anymore 
because the two shoulders of our king Abhayan 
bear the burden of the earth.
Sing and praise our king and pound rice. 

542. “Like Vishnu, who gave nectar to protect the gods, 
our king with powerful arms gives grace
to hundreds of thousands of people
and his decorated royal umbrella covers all the lands, 
surrounded with oceans in all four directions. 
Sing and praise our king and pound rice. 

543. “Many kings bow before the feet of our king Jayathungan, 
who cut off thousands of arms of his enemies 
like the god Vishnu who cut the thousands of arms of Vānasuran. 
Sing and praise our king and pound rice. 

544. “Like Vishnu who went as a messenger, 
with his wheel and other weapons
our king Abhayan with many elephants 
decorated with forehead ornaments
carries many weapons and goes to war.
Sing and praise our king and pound rice. 

545. “Sift the teeth-rice that you have pounded 
with the round sieve that is called “challa vattam’ 
so that the husk will go away and become clean
and make the rice soft.

546. “Clean the floor with your hands.
Use the beautiful quivers 
of the Kalinga warriors as measuring pots 
and measure the flour.

547. “Since the gloves that the warriors wore 
are not large enough to use as measuring pots,
use their quivers as measuring pots.
Scoop the rice from the mortar
and pour it in the cooking pots on the stoves.

548. “Stir and cook the porridge
so it doesn’t overflow
using warriors hands and horses’ legs as spoons 
on Parani day on the battlefield.

549. “Come, take a tiny bit of this porridge 
that is like a treasure for us
on your palm and taste it to see if it has enough salt.

550. “Lower the fire so that you will not be hurt. 
Use your stirring sticks and stir the pots well.
Stir and stir to cook.

551. “Touch the porridge to find out 
whether it is cooked and taste it. 
This porridge tastes much better 
than any we have tasted before.
Come, let us take the pots from the stoves.

552. “Don’t take the pots 
from the stoves with your hands
because you will be burned and drop them.
Use the meat of horses for cloths, 
catch the pots on both sides with your hands
and bring them from the stoves slowly.

553. “You are worried and say, 
‘We cannot finish this porridge 
with just one mouth.”
But do you really need thousands of mouths 
to eat this porridge? 

554. “When our tongues
that have not tasted any food for a long time
taste this porridge, 
won’t the porridge dry quickly like the water 
that is sprinkled on a burning rod?

555. “We have not tasted porridge 
like this before in this world.
Will there be any porridge left over after we have eaten?
We know a way to save this porridge. 

556. “Take as much as blood you want 
for water from the river where hot blood flows
and use the heads of the elephants for pots 
to scoop the blood and make it cool. 

557. “Sweep the floor 
with the tails of dead elephants
using them as brooms
and sprinkle the blood on the floor
to make the floor clean so you can put the pots there.

558. “Use the shields that kings used in the war as plates
and use the skulls of the heads of the kings 
the rulers of the world as drinking cups.
You will have many cups.

559. “Use the golden shields
of the Kalinga warriors who died in the war 
as golden serving dishes
and use the royal white umbrellas that have fallen 
as shining silver pots.

560. “Use the large legs of the long-trunked elephants 
as bowls to drink the porridge
and keep the dishes always full
 so that you will get enough.

561. “Use the anger that flares
from the eyes of the warriors shouting in the battle as lamps.  
 as lamps for those who received the grace of our Anangu
and use the fat of the angry warriors as mats to eat on.

562. “Arranging the plates 
according to the status of the peys,
make them sit in lines with their friends
and pour the porridge for them.
Come to serve the porridge, come.

563. “Use as serving spoons
the heads of the enemy warriors 
that have been struck by spears in the battle 
and fallen outside of the forts of Gangapuri. 

564. “O great cooks, 
you have made porridge on Parani day in Manalur 
when the king fought with his enemies
and you know how to cook and serve.
Come and serve the porridge in lines.

565. “Give porridge to the brahmin peys. 
When they see so much porridge,
they open their mouths and beg continually, 
‘bhavathi, pikshām dehi’.

566. “Check that there is no hair in the porridge,
rinse it with a cloth made of fat 
and serve the porridge to the Jain peys 
that have made a vow not to kill 
and eat only once a day. 

567. “Give the Buddhist peys 
who cover their whole bodies with a skin 
good-smelling porridge made of brains
and let them fill themselves up to their necks
and then babble with their tongues.
Come and serve.

568. “Even though the manager pey ate goat meat,
it is not enough for him and he became thin.
Make the porridge with various kinds of meat 
and give it to the manager pey. 

569. “Pour the porridge 
into the hands of the hungry blind pey
that cannot find his eating dish
because it was stolen
and laments and searches for it with his hands. 

570. “Pour porridge into the hands of the dumb peys 
that point at the porridge with their hands 
and show their hunger with their sorrowful looks. 

571. “Give more porridge to the pregnant pey 
that tastes the porridge, licks her tongue, 
wipes the end of her mouth and says, 
‘My ears were closed before because I was hungry,
but now they have opened after I have tasted the porridge.’

572. “Give porridge to that stupid pey 
that is shocked and does not know what to do 
when he sees his porridge pot is leaking.
He turns it over thinking that it will not leak 
and spills it all.


573. “Give porridge to the accounting pey
that takes a part of the trunk of an elephant,
bites it hard with his teeth and says, 
‘Pour the porridge on the end of this trunk.’

574. “Give more porridge to the dancer pey 
that takes a pot full of porridge, drinks it and says, 
‘My husband will not drink porridge 
but I will drink his share too,’
and she asks for more.

575. “Give porridge to the guest peys 
that saw the war on Parani day once before 
and come now to drink porridge thinking
that they will get porridge on this Parani day in this battle also. 
And do not forget the peys that live in our town.

576. “Give porridge to the pey 
that saw a dream at night 
and told us that there will be a war.
Fill a bowl made of horse skin with porridge
and save it for that pey for tomorrow also. 

577. “Give a lot of porridge to the accountant pey 
that counted us and told how many of us need to be served
because we are not smart enough to count 
how many of us there are to drink porridge. 

578. “Bite the soft white intestines.
use the thin fingers as ginger,
chew the bones of the palms
and swallow the brains. 

579. “You all stay together.
Use lotus buds for garlic, bite 
and scoop the hot porridge, blow and drink.

580. “Ask Brahma to give you three mouths 
and show him how you could use all those mouths
to happily drink the porridge.

581. “Run, sweat and drink the porridge.
Fly like bees, become tired and drink the porridge.
Dance, move around and drink the porridge.
Make sure you have digested the porridge 
you have drunk and then drink some more.

582. “Take cool water in the skulls of the angry elephants
that died from arrows in the war
and use it to rinse your mouths 
after drinking the porridge.

583. “Use the ears of the horses for betel leaves,
their hooves for betel nuts, 
the white part of their eyes for lime,
mix them all together and chew it as pan.

584. “You have eaten too much
and taken too much pan.
O, intoxicated peys!
How will you survive?
Smell the hair on the heads of the bhudams
and it will cure you if you have overeaten and gotten sick.”

The joyful peys

585. They were happy, they looked like large hills
they bent down,
they burped and got fat, 
they prayed to god
and danced on the battlefield. 

586. The peys threw off their clothes, danced
and praised the victory of the warriors of king Manadan. 
They sang how the Chola army routed the Kalinga warriors 
and how the Kalinga warriors left their horses and ran away. 

587. The peys danced swinging both their hands.
They praised the victory of the Chola army
sent by the king who gives joy to all people and protects them. 
They sang how the Chola army 
chased the Kalinga warriors from the battlefield.

588. Some of the peys entered 
the stomach of the dead elephants, 
imitating the Pandiyan warriors 
who entered caves to hide.
Some fell into the flood of blood, 
imitating the Chera warriors who fell into the sea
carrying their banners marked with bows.

589. Some of the peys fell and rolled on the floor 
like the weapons, swords and arrows 
that fell on the battlefield and rolled on it.
Some of the peys ran retreating from the war
with their hair loose, imitating the Kalinga warriors
when they retreated from the war with their hair undone. 

590.The peys sang the victory of our king,
the conquerer of the Kalinga warriors
praised by the brahmins.
They praised the compassion
of our king Abhayan whose arms are adorned with garlands.

591. The peys praised our king Manukula Deepan..
They praised the Chola king, the ruler 
of the lands in all eight directions.
They praise his faultless fame. 
They praised him saying he conquered Sisupalan
and revealed the lies of his enemies
in front of the assembled kings.

592. They praised the king of the Kaveri river.
They praised the king of the Porunai river.
They praised the husband of the virgin queen.
They praised him, the beloved of the Ganges.

593. The peys praised the king with his wheel of justice 
rules the wide lands surrounded by all seven oceans.
They praised the king 
and he will protect his land until the end of the earth. 

594. The peys praised our king
guardian of the earth just like Karikālan 
who protected the land saying, 
“It is my duty to create the second time 
the earth that was created by Brahma, seated on a lotus as he rules.”

595. “May all be happy.
May Dharma flourish everywhere.
May the sweet grace of the gods spread everywhere.
May the sages receive the benefit of their tapas.

596.“May the good paths of the Vedas spread everywhere!
May cruel famine that Abhayan vanquished disappear! 
May the fame of the kings who protect the earth spread!
May the earth remain forever. May rain pour always.”

SUBHAM
-----------
  Extra poems:    

After 133: 
The goddess is never separated from Shiva. 
How can one praise the power of the goddess, 
abiding always with him
as the inner meaning of “om.”

After 589:
Some of the peys pretended they were chieftains, 
and carried drums, royal umbrellas, chowries, garlands, 
tall banners and sounding conches.
They praised the king and said,
“May the king give his grace
so that we may always bring tribute for him 
and worship his ankleted feet.”

The peys praised the king and sang,
“Our king comes in the divine lineage of the Sun. 
He is the god Indira, Abhayan, the protector, 
Ahalangan, the faultless one,
and Arintaman, the best of all. 
Let us praise his limitless fame.”

------------

 சயங்கொண்டார் இயற்றிய கலிங்கத்துப் பரணி

  1.	கடவுள் வாழ்த்து	20 ( 1 - 20) 
 2.	கடை திறப்பு	54 ( 21 - 74)
 3.	காடு பாடியது	22 ( 75 - 96) 
 4.	கோயில் பாடியது	24 ( 97 - 120)
 5.	தேவியைப் பாடியது	13 (121 - 133)
 6.	பேய்களைப் பாடியது	19 (134 - 152)
 7.	      இந்திர சாலம்	25 (153 - 177)
 8.	இராச பாரம்பரியம்	34 (178 - 211)
 9.	பேய் முறைப்பாடு	20 (212 - 231)
 10.	அவதாரம்	  80 (232 - 311)
 11.	காளிக்குக் கூளி கூறியது	92 (312 - 403)
 12.	போர் பாடியது	68 (404 - 471)
 13.	களம் பாடியது	125 (472 - 596)

-------------

 1. கடவுள் வாழ்த்து (1-20) 
சிவ வணக்கம்

1.  புயல்வண்ணன்  புனல்வார்க்கப்  பூமிசையோன் 
  தொழில்காட்டப் புவனவாழ்க்கைச் 
செயல்வண்ணம் நிலைநிறுத்த மலைமகளைப்
   புணர்ந்தவனைச் சிந்தை செய்வாம்

2. அருமறையின்  நெறிகாட்ட அயன்பயந்த
  நிலமகளை அண்டங் காக்கும் 
உரிமையினிற் கைப்பிடித்த  உபயகுலோத்
   தமனபயன் வாழ்க வென்றே.

திருமால் வணக்கம்

3.  ஒருவயிற்றிற் பிறவாது
    பிறந்தருளி உலகொடுக்கும் 
திருவயிற்றிற்று ஒருகுழவி
   திருநாமம் பரவுதுமே.

4. அந்நெடுமால் உதரம்போல்
 அருளபயன் தனிக்கவிகை
இந்நெடுமா நிலமனைத்தும்
   பொதிந்தினிது வாழ்கவென்றே.

நான்முகன் வணக்கம்

5.	உகநான்கும்  பொருள்நான்கும்
 	   உபநிடதம்  ஒருநான்கும்
முகநான்கும்  படைத்துடைய
   முதல்வனையாம் பரவுதுமே.

6.	நிலநான்கும் திசைநான்கும்
 	   நெடுங்கடல்கள் ஒருநான்கும்
குலநான்கும் காத்தளிக்கும்
   குலதீபன் வாழ்கவென்றே.

ஞாயிற்று வணக்கம்

7.	பேராழி உலகனைத்தும் பிறங்கவளர் இருள் நீங்க
 	ஓராழி தனைநடத்தும் ஒண்சுடரைப் பரவுதுமே.

8.	பனியாழி உலகனைத்தும் பரந்தகலி யிருள்நீங்கத்
 	தனியாழி தனைநடத்தும் சயதுங்கன் வாழ்கவென்றே.

யானைமுகன் வணக்கம்

9.	காரணகா ரியங்களின்கட் டறுப்போர் யோகக்
 	   கருத்தென்னுந் தனித்தறியிற் கட்டக் கட்டுண்டு 
ஆரணமா நாற்கூடத் தணைந்து நிற்கும்
   ஐங்கரத்தது ஒருகளிற்றுக்கு அன்பு செய்வாம்.

10.	தனித்தனியே திசையானைத் தறிக ளாகச்
 	   சயத்தம்பம் பலநாட்டி ஒருகூ டத்தே
அனைத்துலகுங் கவித்ததெனக் கவித்து நிற்கும்
   அருட்கவிகைக் கலிப்பகைஞன் வாழ்கவென்றே.

ஆறுமுகன் வணக்கம்

11.	பொன்னிரண்டு வரைதோற்கும் பொருவரிய
 	   நிறம்படைத்த புயமும் கண்ணும் 
பன்னிரண்டும் ஆறிரண்டும் படைத்துடையான்
   அடித்தலங்கள் பணிதல் செய்வாம்.

12.	ஓரிரண்டு திருக்குலமும் நிலைபெறவந்து
 	   ஒருகுடைக்கீழ்க் கடலுந் திக்கும்  
ஈரிரண்டு படைத்துடைய இரவிகுலோத்
   தமனபயன் வாழ்க வென்றே.

நாமகள் வணக்கம்

13.	பூமாதுஞ் சயமாதும் பொலிந்து வாழும்
 	   புயத்திருப்ப மிகவுயரத் திருப்பள் என்று
நாமாதும் கலைமாதும் என்னச் சென்னி
   நாவகத்துள் இருப்பாளை நவிலு வாமே.

14.	எண்மடங்கு புகழ்மடந்தை நல்லன் எங்கோன்
 	   யானவன்பால் இருப்பதுநன் றென்பாள்போல
மண்மடந்தை தன்சீர்த்தி வெள்ளை சாத்தி
   மகிழ்ந்தபிரான் வளவர்பிரான் வாழ்க வென்றே.

உமை வணக்கம்

15.	செய்யதிரு மேனியொரு பாதிகரி தாகத்
 	   தெய்வமுதல் நாயகனை எய்தசிலை மாரன்
கையின்மலர் பாதமலர் மீதும்அணு காநம்
    கன்னிதன் மலர்க்கழல்கள்சென்னிமிசை வைப்பாம்.

16.	கறுத்தசெழி யன்கழல்சி வப்பவரை யேறக்
 	   கார்முகம்வ ளைத்துஉதியர் கோமகன்முடிக்கண்
பொறுத்தமலர் பாதமலர் மீதணிய நல்கும்
   பூழியர்பி ரான்அபயன் வாழ்கஇனி தென்றே.

அன்னையர் எழுவர் வணக்கம்

17.	மேதி புள்ளலகை தோகை யேறுவணம்
 	   வேழம் என்றகொடி ஏழுடைச்
சோதி மென்கொடிகள் ஏழின் ஏழிருது
   ணைப்ப தந்தொழநி னைத்துமே.

18.	கேழல் மேழிகலை யாளி வீணைசிலை
 	   கெண்டை என்றினைய பல்கொடி
தாழ மேருவிலு யர்த்த செம்பியர்த
   னிப்பு லிக்கொடித ழைக்கவே.

வாழ்த்து

19.	விதிமறை யவர்தொழில் விளைகவே
 	   விளைதலின் முகில்மழை பொழிகவே
நிதிதரு பயிர்வளம் நிறைகவே
   நிறைதலின் உயிர்நிலை பெறுகவே.

20.	தலமுதல் உளமனு வளர்கவே
 	   சயதரன் உயர்புலி வளர்கவே 
நிலவுமிழ் கவிகையும் வளர்கவே
   நிதிபொழி கவிகையும் வளர்கவே.
----------- 
---------
 2. கடை திறப்பு (21-74).  

உறுப்புநலங் கூறி விளித்தது

21.	சூதளவு அளவெனும் இளமுலைத்
 	   துடியளவு அளவெனும் நுண்ணிடைக்
காதளவு அளவெனும் மதர்விழிக்
   கடலமு தனையவர் திறமினோ.

முலை நலங் கூறி விளித்தது

22.	புடைபட இளமுலை வளர்தொறும்
 	   பொறைஅறி வுடையரும் நிலைதளர்ந்து
இடைபடு வதுபட அருளுவீர்
   இடுகதவு உயர்கடை திறமினோ.

நடையழகு கூறி விளித்தது

23.	சுரிகுழல் அசைவுற அசைவுறத்
 	   துயிலெழும் மயிலென மயிலெனப்
பரிபுர ஒலியெழ ஒலியெழப்.
   பனிமொழி யவர்கடை திறமினோ.

கனவுநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

24.	கூடிய இன்கன வதனிலே
 	   கொடைநர துங்கனொடு அணைவுறாது
ஊடிய நெஞ்சினொடு ஊடுவீர்
   உமது நெடுங்கடை திறமினோ.

ஊடல்நிலை கூறி விளித்தது

25.	விடுமின் எங்கள்துகில் விடுமின் என்றுமுனி
 	   வெகுளி மென் குதலை துகிலினைப்
பிடிமின் என்றபொருள் விளைய நின்றருள்செய்
   பெடைந லீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

கனவுநிலை கூறி வி்ளித்தது

26.	எனத டங்கஇனி வளவ துங்கனருள்
 	   எனம கிழ்ந்துஇரவு கனவிடைத்
தனத டங்கள்மிசை நகந டந்தகுறி
    தடவு வீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

 ஊடல் உவகை நிலை கூறி விளித்தது

27.	முனிபவர் ஒத்திலராய் முறுவல்கி ளைத்தலுமே
 	   முகிழ்நகை பெற்றமெனா மகிழ்நர்ம ணித்துவர்வாய்
கனிபவ ளத்தருகே வருதலும் முத்துதிரும்
    கயல்களி ரண்டுடையீர் கடைதிற மின்திறமின்.

பொய்த்துயில் நிலை கூறி விளித்தது

28.	இத்துயில் மெய்த்துயிலே என்றுகு றித்திளைஞோர்
 	    இதுபுல விக்குமருந் தெனமனம் வைத்தடியில்
கைத்தலம் வைத்தலுமே பொய்த்துயில் கூர்நயனக்
    கடைதிற வாமடவீர் கடைதிற மின்திறன்.

  கனவுநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

29.	இகலி ழந்தரசர் தொழவ ருப்பவனி
 	   இரவு கந்தருளு கனவினில்
பகலி ழந்தநிறை பெறமு யன்றுமொழி
   பதறு வீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

பற்குறியணி கூறி விளித்தது

30.	முத்து வடஞ்சேர் முகிழ்முலைமேல்
 	   முயங்குங் கொழுநர் மணிச்செவ்வாய்
வைத்த பவள வடம்புனைவீர்
   மணிப்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

குலோத்துங்கன்பால் கொண்ட மையல்கூறி விளித்தது

31.	தண்கொடை மானதன் மார்புதோய்
 	   தாதகி மாலையின் மேல்விழும் 
கண்கொடு போம்வழி தேடுவீர்
   கனகநெ டுங்கடை திறமினோ.

இதுவும் அது

32.	அஞ்சியே கயல்கெடக் கூடலிற் பொருதுசென்று
 	   அணிகடைக் குழையிலே விழஅடர்த் தெறிதலால்
வஞ்சிமா னதன்விடும் படையினிற் கொடியகண்
   மடநலீர் இடுமணிக் கடைதிறந் திடுமினோ.

புணர்ச்சி நிலை கூறி விளித்தது

33.	அவசமுற் றுளம்நெகத்  துயில்நெகப் பவளவாய்
 	   அணிசிவப்  பறவிழிக் கடைசிவப் புறநிறைக்
கவசமற்று இளநகைக் களிவரக் களிவரும்
   கணவரைப் புணருவீர் கடைதிறந் திடுமினோ.

கலவி மயக்க நிலை கூறி விளித்த

34.	கலவிக்களியின் மயக்கத்தாற்
 	  கலைபோய் அகலக் கலைமதியின்
நிலவைத் துகிலென் றெடுத்துடுப்பீர்
   நீள்பொற் கபாடந் திறமினோ.

காமமயக்கநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

35.	நனவினிற் சயதரன் புணரவே பெறினுநீர்
 	   நனவெனக் தெளிவுறாது அதனையும் பழையஅக்
கனவெனக் கூறுவீர் தோழி மார் நகைமுகங்
   கண்டபின் தேறுவீர் கடைதிறந் திடுமினோ.

ஊடலும் கூடலும் விழைந்த இயல்புகூறி விளித்தது

36.	மெய்யே கொழுநர் பிழைநலிய
 	   வேட்கை நலிய விடியளவும்
பொய்யே உறங்கும் மடநல்லீர்
   புனைபொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

கலவி மயக்கநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

37.	போக அமளிக் களிமயக்கில்
 	   புலர்ந்த தறியா தேகொழுநர்
ஆக அமளி மிசைத்துயில்வீர்
   அம்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

கணவர் வரவு பார்க்கும் நிலை கூறி விளித்தது

38.	ஆளுங் கொழுநர் வரவுபார்த்து
 	  அவர்தம் வரவு காணாமல்
தாளும் மனமும் புறம்பாகச்
   சாத்தும் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

கொங்கையின் அழகு கூறி விளித்தது

39.	உந்திச் சுழியின் முளைத்தெழுந்த
 	   உரோமப் பசுந்தாள் ஒன்றில் இரண்டு
அந்திக் கமலங் கொடுவருவீர்
   அம்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.


பெண்கள் வேளம் புகுந்த தன்மை கூறி விளித்தது

40.	மீனம்புகு கொடிமீனவர் விழியம்புக ஓடிக்
 	கானம்புக வேளம்புகு மடவீர் கடை திறமின்.

பெண்களைத் திறையாகப் பெற்றமை கூறி விளித்தது

41.	அலைநாடிய புனல்நாடுடை அபயற்கிடு திறையா
 	மலைநாடியர் துளுநாடியர் மனையிற்கடை திறமின்.

கணவரோ டுடனுறையுநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

42.	விலையி லாதவடம் முலையி லாடவிழி
 	   குழையி லாடவிழை கணவர்தோள்
மலையி லாடிவரு மயில்கள் போலவரு
   மடந லீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

பெண்களைத் திறையாகப் பெற்றமை கூறி விளித்தது

41.	அலைநாடிய புனல்நாடுடை அபயற்கிடு திறையா
 	மலைநாடியர் துளுநாடியர் மனையிற்கடை திறமின்.

கணவரோ டுடனுறையுநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

42.	விலையி லாதவடம் முலையி லாடவிழி
 	   குழையி லாடவிழை கணவர்தோள்
மலையி லாடிவரு மயில்கள் போலவரு
   மடந லீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

கன்னட நாட்டினரான பெண்களை விளித்தது

43.	மழலைத்திரு மொழியிற்சில வடுகும் சில தமிழும்
 	குழறித்தரு கருநாடியர் கறுகிக்கடை திறமின்.

ஊடலும் கூடலும் விழைந்த இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

44.	தழுவுங் கொழுநர் பிழைநலியத்
 	  தழுவேல் என்னத் தழுவியகை
வழுவ உடனே மயங்கிடுவீர்
   மணிப்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

நகையின் சிறப்புக் கூறி விளித்தது

45.	வேகம் விளைய வருங்கொழுநர்
 	   மேனி சிவந்த படிநோக்கிப்
போகம் விளைய நகைசெய்வீர்
   புனைபொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

துயிலெழுந்த நிலைகூறி விளித்தது

46.	சொருகு கொந்தளகம் ஒருகை மேலலைய
 	   ஒருகை கீழலைசெய் துகிலொடே
திருவ னந்தலினும் முகம லர்ந்துவரு
   தெரிவை மீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

நகக்குறி கண்டு களித்தமை கூறி விளித்தது

47.	முலைமீது கொழுநர்கைந் நகமேவு குறியை
 	   முன்செல்வ மில்லாத அவர்பெற்ற பொருள்போல்
கலைநீவி யாரேனு மில்லாவி டத்தே
   கண்ணுற்று நெஞ்சங்க ளிப்பீர்கள் திறமின.்

விழி இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

48.	கடலில் விடமென அமுதென மதனவேள்
 	   கருதி வழிபடு படையொடு கருதுவார்
உடலின் உயிரையும் உணர்வையும் நடுவுபோய்
   உருவு மதர்விழி யுடையவர் திறமினோ.

தோற்ற இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

49.	முறுவல் மாலையொடு தரள மாலைமுக
 	   மலரின் மீதும்முலை முகிழினும்
சிறுநி லாவும்அதின் மிகுதி லாவும்என
   வருந லீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

மனங்கவரும் இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

50.	முருகிற் சிவந்த கழுநீரும்
 	   முதிரா இளைஞர் ஆருயிரும்
திருகிச் செருகும் குழல்மடவீர்
   செம்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

கூடல் இழைத்த இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

51.	மெய்யில ணைத்துருகிப் பையஅ கன்றவர்தாம்.
 	   மீள்வரெ னக்கருதிக் கூடல்வி ளைத்துஅறவே
கையில ணைத்தமணல் கண்பனி சோர்புனலில்
   கரையவி ழுந்தழுவீர் கடைதிற மின்திறமின் .

ஊடல் இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தல்

52.	செருவிள நீர்பட வெம்முலைச்
 	   செவ்விள நீர்படு சேயரிக்
கருவிள நீர்பட ஊடுவீர்
   கனகநெ டுங்கடை திறமினோ.

கலவி நிலைகூறி விளித்தது

53.	அளக பாரமிசை அசைய மேகலைகள்
 	  அவிழ ஆபரண மிவையெலாம்
இளக மாமுலைகள் இணைய றாமல்வரும்
   இயன லீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

இதுவும் அது

54.	மதுர மானமொழி பதற வான்விழிசி
 	  வப்ப வாயிதழ்வெ ளுப்பவே
அதர பானமது பான மாகஅறி
   வழியு மாதர்கடை திறமினோ.

நோயும் மருந்துமாந்தன்மை கூறி விளித்தது

55.	தங்குகண் வேல்செய்த புண்களைத்
 	   தடமுலை வேதுகொண் டொற்றியும்
செங்கனி வாய்மருந் தூட்டுவீர்
   செம்பொன் நெடுங்கடை திறமினோ.

இதுவும் அது

56.	பொருங்கண் வேலிளைஞர் மார்பி னூடுருவு
 	   புண்கள் தீரஇரு கொங்கையின்
கருங்கண் வேதுபட ஒற்றி மென்கைகொடு
   கட்டு மாதர்கடை திறமினோ.

கூந்தலியல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

57.	இடையி னிலையரி திறுமிறு மெனஎழா
 	   எமது புகலிடம் இனிஇலை யெனவிழா
அடைய மதுகரம் எழுவது விழுவதாம்
   அளக வனிதையர் அணிகடை திறமினோ.

நடை இயல்புகூறி விளித்தது

58.	உபய தனமசையில் ஒடியுமிடை நடையை
 	   ஒழியும் ஒழியுமென ஒண்சிலம்பு
அபய மபயமென அலற நடைபயிலும்
   அரிவை மீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

காவிரியை ஒப்புக்கூறி விளித்தது

59.	பூவிரி மதுகரம் நுகரவும்
 	   பொருகயல் இருகரை புரளவும்
காவிரி எனவரும் மடநலீர்
   கனகநெ டுங்கடை திறமினோ.

கூந்தலியல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

60.	களப வண்டலிடு கலச கொங்கைகளின்
 	   மதிஎ ழுந்துகனல் சொரியுமென்று
அளக பந்திமிசை அளிகள் பந்தரிடும்
   அரிவை மீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ .

புணர்ச்சிநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

61.	வாயின் சிவப்பை விழிவாங்க
 	   மலர்க்கண் வெளுப்பை வாய்வாங்கத்
தோயக் கலவி அமுதளிப்பீர்
   துங்கக் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

இதுவும் அது

62.	கூடும் இளம்பிறையில் குறுவெயர் முத்துருளக்
 	   கொங்கை வடம்புரளச் செங்கழு நீரளகக்
காடு குலைந்தலையக் கைவளை பூசலிடக்
   கலவி விடாமடவீர் கடைதிறமின் திறமின்.

கலிங்கப் போர்ப்பாடல் கேட்குமாறு விளித்தது

63.	காஞ்சி இருக்கக் கலிங்கங் குலைந்த
 	   கலவி மடவீர் கழற்சென்னி
காஞ்சி இருக்கக் கலிங்கங் குலைந்த
   களப்போர் பாடத் திறமினோ.

இதுவும் அது

64.	இலங்கை எறிந்த கருணா கரன்தன்
 	  இகல்வெஞ் சிலையின் வலிகேட்பீர்
கலிங்கம் எறிந்த கருணா கரன்தன்
   களப்போர் பாடத் திறமினோ.

காதல் இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

65.	பேணுங் கொழுநர் பிழைகளெலாம்
 	   பிரிந்த பொழுது நினைந்துஅவரைக் 
காணும் பொழுது மறந்திருப்பீர்
   கனப்பொற் கபாடந் திறமினோ.

கணவரோடு பயிலுமியல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

66.	வாச மார்முலைகள் மார்பி லாடமது
 	   மாலை தாழ்குழலின் வண்டெழுந்து 
ஊச லாடவிழி பூச லாடஉற
   வாடு வீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

கலவி மயக்க நிலை கூறி விளித்தது

67.	நேயக் கலவி மயக்கத்தே
 	   நிகழ்ந்த மொழியைக் கிளியுரைப்ப
வாயைப் புதைக்கும் மடநல்லீர்
   மணிப்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

பிரிவாற்றா நிலைகூறி விளித்தது

68.	பொங்கு மதிக்கே தினம்நடுங்கிப்
 	   புகுந்த அறையை நிலஅறைஎன்று
அங்கும் இருக்கப் பயப்படுவீர்
   அம்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

கொழுநர் வரவுபார்த்திருந்த நிலைகூறி விளித்தது

69.	வருவார் கொழுநர் எனத்திறந்தும்
 	   வாரார் கொழுநர் எனவடைத்தும் 
திருகும் குடுமி விடியளவும்
   தேயும் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

கூடியும் ஊடியும் நின்றநிலை கூறி விளித்தது

70.	ஊடு வீர்கொழுநர் தங்கள் பான்முனிவொ
 	   ழிந்து கூடுதலின் உங்களைத்
தேடுவீர் கடைகள் திறமி னோஇனிய
   தெரிவை மீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

கண்ணியல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

71.	பண்படு கிளவியை அமுதெனப்
 	   பரவிய கொழுநனை நெறிசெயக்
கண்கொடு கொலைசெய அருளுவீர்
   கனகநெ டுங்கடை திறமினோ.

பிரிவாற்றா வியல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

72.	பிழைநி னைந்துருகி அணைவு றாமகிழ்நர்
 	   பிரிதல் அஞ்சிவிடு கண்கணீர்
மழைத தும்பவிரல் தரையி லேஎழுது
   மடந லீர்கடைகள் திறமினோ.

குலோத்துங்கனோடு ஒப்பித்து விளித்தது

73.	நக்காஞ் சிக்கும் வடம லைக்கும்
 	   நடுவில் வெளிக்கே வேடனைவிட்டு 
அக்கா னகத்தே உயிர்பறிப்பீர்
   அம்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.

மனங்கவரும் இயல்பு கூறி விளித்தது

74.	செக்கச் சிவந்த கழுநீரும்
 	   செகத்தில் இளைஞ ராருயிரும்  
ஒக்கச் செருகும் குழன்மடவீர்
   உம்பொற் கபாடம் திறமினோ.
-----------
 3. காடு பாடியது  (75-96) 

தோற்றுவாய்

75.	களப்போர் விளைந்த கலிங்கத்துக்
 	   கலிங்கர் நிணக்கூழ் களப்பேயின்
உளப்போர் இரண்டு நிறைவித்தாள்
   உறையும் காடு பாடுவாம்.

காட்டின் இயல்பு கூறியது

76.	பொரிந்த காரை கரிந்த சூரைபு
 	   கைந்த வீரையெ ரிந்த வேய்
உரிந்த பாரையெ றிந்த பாலையு
   லர்ந்த வோமைக லந்தவே.

இதுவும் அது 

77.	உதிர்ந்த வெள்ளிலு  ணங்கு நெல்லியொ
 	   டுங்கு துள்ளியு லர்ந்தவேல்
பிதிர்ந்த முள்ளிசி தைந்த வள்ளிபி
   ளந்த கள்ளிப ரந்தவே.

இதுவும் அது

78.	வற்றல் வாகைவ றந்த கூகைம
 	   டிந்த தேறுபொ டிந்தவேல்
முற்ற லீகைமு ளிந்த விண்டுமு
   ரிந்த புன்குநி ரைந்தவே.

நிலஇயல்பு கூறியது

79.	தீய வக்கொடிய கான கத்தரைதி
 	   றந்த வாய்தொறும்நு ழைந்துதன்
சாயை புக்கவழி யாதெ னப்பரிதி
   தன்க ரங்கொடுதி ளைக்குமே.

நிழலின்மை கூறியது

80.	ஆடு கின்றசிறை வெம்ப ருந்தினிழல்
 	   அஞ்சி அக்கடுவ னத்தைவிட்டு
ஓடு கின்றநிழல் ஒக்கு நிற்குநிழல்
   ஓரி டத்தும்உள அல்லவே.

இதுவும் அது

81.	ஆத வம்பருகும் என்று நின்றநிழல்
 	   அங்கு நின்றுகுடி போனதப்
பாத வம்புனல்பெ றாது ணங்குவன
   பருகும் நம்மையென வெருவியே.

புறாத் தென்படல் கூறியது

82.	செந்நெ ருப்பினைத் தகடு செய்துபார்
 	   செய்த தொக்குமச் செந்த ரைப்பரப்பு
அந்நெ ருப்பினில் புகைதி ரண்டதொப்பு
   அல்லது ஒப்புறா அதனி டைப்புறா.

மான்கள் இயல்பு கூறியது

83.	தீயின் வாயின்நீர் பெறினு முண்பதோர்
 	   சிந்தை கூரவாய் வெந்து வந்துசெந்
நாயின் வாயின்நீர் தன்னை நீரெனா
   நவ்வி நாவினால் நக்கி விக்குமே.

நிலத்தின் வெம்மை கூறியது

84.	இந்நி லத்துளோர் ஏக லாவதற்கு.
 	   எளிய தானமோ அரிய வானுளோர்
அந்நி லத்தின்மேல் வெம்மை யைக்குறித்து
   அல்ல வோநிலத்து அடியி டாததே.

இதுவும் அது

85.	இருபொழுதும் இரவிபசும் புரவிவிசும்பு
 	   இயங்காதது இயம்பக் கேண்மின்
ஒருபொழுதுந் தரித்தன்றி ஊடுபோ
   கரிது அணங்கின் காடென் றன்றோ.

இதுவும் அது

86.	காடிதனைக் கடத்தும்எனக் கருமுகிலும்
 	   வெண்மதியுங் கடக்க அப்பால்  
ஓடிஇளைத்து உடல்வியர்த்த வியர்வன்றோ
   உகுபுனலும் பனியும் ஐயோ.

இதுவும் அது

87.	விம்முகடு விசைவனத்தின் வெம்மையினைக்
 	   குறித்தன்றோ விண்ணோர் விண்ணின்
மைம்முகடு முகிற்றிரையிட்டு அமுதவட்ட
   வாலவட்டம் எடுப்ப தையோ.

மரங்களின் தோற்றம் கூறியது

88.	நிலம்புடைபேர்ந் தோடாமே
 	   நெடுமோடி நிறுத்தியபேய்
புலம்பொடுநின் றுயிர்ப்பனபோல்
   புகைந்துமரங் கரிந்துளவால்.

இதுவும் அது

89.	வற்றியபேய் வாயுலர்ந்து
 	   வறள்நாக்கை நீட்டுவபோல்
முற்றிய நீள் மரப்பொதும்பின்
   முதுப்பாம்பு புறப்படுமே.

சூறாவளியின் இயல்பு கூறியது

90.	விழிசுழல வருபேய்த்தேர்
 	   மிதந்துவரு நீர்அந்நீர்ச்
சுழிசுழல வருவதெனச்
   சூறைவளி சுழன்றிடுமால்.

மணிகள் கிடத்தல் கூறியது

91.	சிதைந்தவுடற் சுடுசுடலைப் பொடியைச் சூறை
 	   சீத்தடிப்பச் சிதறியவப் பொடியால் செம்மை
புதைந்தமணி புகைபோர்த்த தழலே போலும்
   போலாவேற் பொடிமூடு தணலே போலும்.

மூங்கில் முத்துதிர்தல் கூறியது

92.	மண்ணோடி அறவறந்து துறந்து அங்காந்த
 	   வாய்வழியே வேய்பொழியும் முத்தம் அவ்வேய்
கண்ணோடிச் சொரிகின்ற கண்ணீ ரன்றேல்
   கண்டிரங்கிச் சொரிகின்ற கண்ணீர் போலும்

இதுவும் அது

93.	வெடித்தகழை விசைதெறிப்பத் தரைமேல் முத்தம்
 	   வீழ்ந்தனஅத் தரைபுழுங்கி அழன்று மேன்மேற் 
பொடித்தவியர்ப் புள்ளிகளே போலும் போலும்
   போலாவேல் கொப்புளங்கள் போலும் போலும்.

காற்றின் இயல்பு கூறியது

94.	பல்கால்திண் திரைக்கரங்கள் கரையின் மேன்மேற்
 	   பாய்கடல்கள் நூக்குமது அப்படர்வெங் கானிற்
செல்காற்று வாராமல் காக்க அன்றோ
   திசைக்கரியின் செவிக்காற்றும் அதற்கே யன்றோ.

வெப்பநிலை கூறியது

95.	முள்ளாறும் கல்லாறும் தென்னர் ஓட
 	   மின்னொருநாள் வாளபயன் முனிந்த போரின்
வெள்ளாறும் கோட்டாறும் புகையான் மூட
   வெந்தவனம் இந்தவனம் ஒக்கில் ஒக்கும்.

மணல் இயல்பு கூறியது

96.	அணிகொண்ட குரங்கினங்கள
 	   அலைகடலுக்கு அப்பாலை
மணலொன்று காணாமல்
   வரைஎடுத்து மயங்கினவே.
-------------
 4. கோயில் பாடியது  (97-120) 

தோற்றுவாய்

97.	ஓதி வந்தஅக் கொடிய கானகத்து
 	   உறைய ணங்கினுக்கு அயன்வ குத்தவிப்
பூத லம்பழங் கோயில் என்னி்னும்
   புதிய கோயிலுண்டுஅது விளம்புவாம் 

கோயில் கடைகால் இயல்பு கூறியது

98. 	வட்ட வெண்குடைச் சென்னி மானதன்
 	   வாளின் வாயினால் மறலி வாயிடைப்
பட்ட மன்னர்தம் பட்ட மங்கையர்
   பரும ணிக்கருத் திருஇ ருத்தியே.

சுவர் இயல்பு கூறியது

99.	துவர்நி றக்களிற்று உதிய ரேவலின்
 	   சுரிகை போர்முகத்து உருவி நேரெதிர்த்து
அவர்நி ணத்தொடுஅக் குருதி நீர்குழைத்து
   அவர்க ருந்தலைச் சுவர டுக்கியே.

தூண் உத்திர இயல்பு கூறியது

100.	அறிஞர் தம்பிரான் அபயன் வாரணம்
 	   அரசர் மண்டலத் தரண றப்பறித்து
எறித ரும்பெருங் கணைம ரங்கள்கொண்டு
   எழுது தூணொடு உத்திர மியற்றியே.

துலாம் பா இயல்பு கூறியது

101.	கடித ழிந்துபோர் மிதிலை யிற்படும்
 	   கரிம ருப்பினைத் திரள்து லாமெனும்
படிப ரப்பிஅப் பரும யானையின்
   பழுஎ லும்பினில் பாஅ டுக்கியே

நாசிகை இயல்பு கூறியது

102.	மீளி மாவுகைத்து அபயன் முன்னொர்நாள்
 	   விருத ராசரைப் பொருது கொண்டபோர்
ஆளி வாரணங் கேழல் சீயமென்று
   அவைநி ரைத்துநா சிகையி ருத்தியே.

மேற்கூரை இயல்பு கூறியது

103.	துங்க பத்திரைச் செங் களத்திடைச்
 	   சோள சேகரன் வாளெ றிந்தபோர்
வெங்க தக்களிற் றின்ப டத்தினால்
   வெளிஅ டங்கவே மிசைக விக்கவே

கோபுர மதில் இயல்பு கூறியது

104.	கொள்ளிவாய்ப் பேய்காக்கும்
 	   கோபுரமும் நெடுமதிலும்
வெள்ளியால் சமைத்ததென
   வெள்ளெலும்பி னால்சமைத்தே

மகரதோரண இயல்பு கூறியது

105.	காரிரும்பின் மகரதோ ரணமாகக் கரும்பேய்கள்
 	ஓரிரண்டு கால்நாட்டி ஓரிரும்பை மிசைவளைத்தே.

அணி செயல் வகை கூறியது

106.	மயிற்கழுத்தும் கழுத்தரிய மலர்ந்தமுகத்
 	   தாமரையும் மருங்கு சூழ்ந்த
எயிற்கழுத்தும் நிணக்கொடியும் இளங்குழவி
   பசுந்தலையும் எங்கும் தூக்கி.

இதுவும் அது

107.	பணியாத வழுதியர்தம் பாய்களிற்றின்
 	   செவிச்சுளகு பலவும் தூக்கி
மணியூசல் எனமதுரை மகரதோ
   ரணம்பறித்து மறித்து நாட்டி.

இதுவும் அது

108.	பரிவிருத்தி அலகிட்டுப் பசுங்குருதி
 	   நீர்தெளித்து நிணப்பூச் சிந்தி
எரிவிரித்த ஈமவிளக்கு எம்மருங்கும்
   ஏற்றியதோர் இயல்பிற் றாலோ.

வழிபாட்டியல்பு கூறியது

109.	சலியாத தனியாண்மைத் தறுகண் வீரர்
 	     தருகவரம் வரத்தினுக்குத் தக்க தாகப்
பலியாக உறுப்பரிந்து தருதும் என்று
     பரவுமொலி கடலொலிபோல் பரக்கு மாலோ.

இதுவும் அது

110.	சொல்லரிய ஓமத்தீ வளர்ப்ப ராலோ
 	     தொழுதிருந்து பழுவெலும்பு தொடரவாங்கி
வல்லெரியின் மிசைஎரிய விடுவ ராலோ
     வழிகுருதி நெய்யாக வார்ப்ப ராலோ.

இதுவும் அது

 111.	அடிக்கழுத்தின் நெடுஞ்சிரத்தை அரிவ ராலோ
 	     அரிந்தசிரம் அணங்கின்கைக் கொடுப்ப ராலோ
கொடுத்தசிரம் கொற்றவையைப் பரவு மாலோ
     குறையுடலம் கும்பிட்டு நிற்கு மாலோ.

பலியிட்ட தலை இயல்பு கூறியது

112.	நீண்டபலி பீடத்தில் அரிந்து வைத்த
 	     நெடுங்குஞ்சிச் சிரத்தைத்தன் னினமென் றெண்ணி
ஆண்டலைப்புள் அருகணைந்து பார்க்கு மாலோ
     அணைதலும்அச் சிரம்அச்ச முறுத்து மாலோ.

உடல் கண்ட பேய்நிலை கூறியது

113.	கடன மைந்ததுக ருந்தலைஅ ரிந்த பொழுதே
 	     கடவ தொன்றுமிலை என்றுவிளை யாடு முடலே
உடல்வி ழுந்திடின்நு கர்ந்திடஉ வந்த சிலபேய்
     உறுபெ ரும்பசிஉடன்றிடஉ டன்திரியுமே.

எருமைக்கடாப் பலி கூறியது

114.	பகடி டந்துகொள்ப சுங்குருதி இன்று தலைவி
 	     பலிகொள் என்றகுரல் எண்டிசைபி ளந்துமிசைவான்
முகடி டந்துரும் எறிந்தெனமு ழங்க உடனே்
     மொகுமொ கென்றொலிமி குந்தமரு கங்கள் பலவே.

சாதகர் இயல்பு கூறியது

115.	தமரு கங்கள்தரு கின்றசதி யின்கண் வருவார்
 	அமரி இன்புறும்அ நாதிவரு சாத கர்களே .

யோகினியர் இயல்பு கூறியது.

116.	படைவ லங்கொடுப சுந்தலைஇ டங்கொ டணைவார்
 	இடைமொ ழிந்து இடைநு டங்கவரு யோகினிகளே. 

பேய் இயல்பு கூறியது

117.	வீங்குதலை நெடுங்கழையின் மிசைதோறுந்
 	திசைதோறும் விழித்து நின்று
தூங்குதலை சிரிப்பனகண் டுறங்குதலை
மறந்திருக்கும் சுழல்கட் சூர்ப்பேய்.

பலிஇட்ட தலை இயல்பு கூறியது

118.	அரிந்ததலை உடனமர்ந்தே ஆடுகழை
 	   அலைகுருதிப் புனலின் மூழ்கி
இருந்தவுடல் கொளக்காலன் இடுகின்ற
  நெடுந்தூண்டில் என்னத் தோன்றும்.

கொள்ளிவாய்ப் பேய் இயல்பு கூறியது

119.	கொல்வாய் ஓரி முழவாகக்
 	   கொள்ளி வாய்ப்பேய் குழவிக்கு
நல்வாய்ச் செய்ய தசைதேடி
   நரிவாய்த் தசையைப் பறிக்குமால்.

காளி கோயிலின் சூழலிட இயல்பு கூறியது

120.	நிணமும் தசையும் பருந்திசிப்ப
  நெருப்பும் பருத்தி யும்போன்று
பிணமும் பேயும் சுடுகாடும்
   பிணங்கு நரியும் உடைத்தரோ.
-------------
 5. தேவியைப் பாடியது (121-133) 

தோற்றுவாய்

121.	உவையுவை உளஎன் றெண்ணி
 	   உரைப்ப தென்உரைக் கவந்த
அவை அவை மகிழ்ந்த மோடி
   அவயவம் விளம்பல் செய்வாம்,

இணையடிச் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

122.	ஒருமலை மத்துவலித்து உலவுக யிற்றினுமற்று
 	   உலகுப ரித்தபணத்து உரகவ டத்தினும்அப்
பருமணி முத்துநிரைத்து உடுமணி தைத்தஇணைப்
   பரிபுரம் வைத்ததளிர்ப் பதயுக ளத்தினளே.

கூத்தின் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

123.	அரவொடு திக்கயமப் பொழுதுப ரித்தவிடத்து
 	   அடியிட உட்குழிவுற்று அசைவுறும் அப்பொழுதில்
தரணித ரித்ததெனப் பரணிப ரித்தபுகழ்ச்
   சயதர னைப்பரவிச் சதிகொள்ந டத்தினளே.

தனத்தின் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

124.	தணிதவ ளப்பிறையைச் சடைமிசை வைத்தவிடைத்
 	   தலைவர்வ னத்தினிடைத் தனிநுகர் தற்குநினைத்து
அணிதவ ளப்பொடியிட்டு அடையவி லச்சினையிட்டு
   அமுதமி ருத்தியசெப் பனையத னத்தினளே.

உடைச் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

125.	பரிவக லத்தழுவிப் புணர்கல விக்குருகிப்
 	     படர்சடை முக்கணுடைப் பரமர்கொ டுத்தகளிற்று
உரிமிசை யக்கரியிற் குடரொடு கட்செவியிட்டு
     ஒருபுரி இட்டுஇறுகப் புனையுமு டுக்கையளே.

வயிற்றின் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

126.	கலைவளர் உத்தமனைக் கருமுகில் ஒப்பவனைக்
 	     கரடத டக்கடவுட் கனகநி றத்தவனைச்
சிலைவளை வுற்றவுணத் தொகைசெக விட்டபரித்
     திறலவ னைத்தரும்அத் திருஉத ரத்தினளே.

மேலாடைச் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

127.	கவளம தக்கரடக் கரியுரி வைக்கயிலைக்
 	     களிறுவி ருப்புறும்அக் கனகமு லைத்தரளத்
தவளவ டத்திடையிற் பவளமொ டொத்தெரியத்
     தழலுமிழ் உத்தரியத் தனிஉர கத்தினளே.

கையின் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

128.	அரியுமி டற்றலையிட்டு அலைகுரு திக்கெதிர்வைத்து
 	     அறவும டுத்தசிவப் பதனைமு ழுத்திசையின்
கரிகர டத்தொளையின் கலுழியி டைக்கழுவிக்
     கருமைப டைத்தசுடர்க் கரகம லத்தினளே.

உதட்டின் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

129.	சிமையவ ரைக்கனகத் திரளுரு கப்பரவைத்
 	     திரைசுவ றிப்புகையத் திசைசுடு மப்பொழுதத்து
இமையவ ரைத்தகைதற்கு இருளுமி டற்றிறைவதற்கு
     இனியத ரத்தமுதக் கனியத ரத்தினளே

வாயின் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

130.	உருகுத லைத்தொ டையற்கு வமைய றச்சுழல்வுற்று
 	   உலவுவி ழிக்கடைபட்டு உடல்பகை யற்றொழியத்
திருகுரவைக் கிளவிச் சிறுகுத லைப்பவளச்
   சிறுமுறு வற்றரளத் திருவத னத்தினளே.

திருமுகச் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

131.	அருமறை யொத்தகுலத்து,அருணெறியொத்த குணத்து
 	   அபயனு தித்தகுலத்து உபயகு லத்துமுதல்
திருமதி யொக்குமெனத் தினகர னொக்குமெனத்
   திகழ்வத னத்தினிடைத் திலகவ னப்பினளே.

பேருருவச் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

132.	அண்டமுறு குலகிரிகள்
 	   அவளொருகால் இருகாதில்
கொண்டணியின் குதம்பையுமாம்
   கோத்தணியின் மணிவடமாம்.

இதுவும் அது

133.	கைம்மலர்மேல் அம்மனையாம்
  கந்துகமாம் கழங்குமாம்
அம்மலைகள் அவள்வேண்டின்
   ஆகாத தொன்றுண்டோ.

*ஓங்காரத் துட்பொருளாய்
   ஒருவாது நடந்தாளை
நீங்காமல் நின்றாளை
   எவ்வண்ணம் நிகழ்த்துவாம்.

------------
 6. பேய்களைப் பாடியது  (134-152) 

தோற்றுவாய்

134.	எவ்வணங்கும் அடிவணங்க
 	   இப்பெருமை படைத்துடைய
அவ்வணங்கை அகலாத
   அலகைகளை இனிப்பகர்வாம்.

பேய்களின் கைகால் இயல்பு கூறியது

135.	பெருநெ டும்பசி பெய்கல மாவன
 	   பிற்றை நாளின்முன் னாளின் மெலிவன
கருநெ டும்பனங் காடுமு ழுமையுங்
   காலுங் கையுமு டையன போல்வன.

வாய், வயிறு முழந்தாள் இயல்பு கூறியது

136.	வன்பி லத்தொடு வாதுசெய் வாயின
 	   வாயி னால்நிறை யாதவ யிற்றின
முன்பி ருக்கின்மு கத்தினு மேற்செல
   மும்மு ழம்படும் அம்முழந் தாளின.

உடம்பின் இயல்பு கூறியது

137.	வெற்றெ லூம்பைந ரம்பின்வ லித்துமேல்
 	   வெந்தி லாவிற கேய்ந்தவு டம்பின
கொற்ற லம்பெறு கூழிலம் எங்களைக்
   கொள்வ தேபணி யென்றுகு ரைப்பன

கன்னம், விழி, இயல்பு கூறியது

138.	உள்ளொ டுங்கியி ரண்டுமொன் றாகவே
 	   ஒட்டி ஒட்டிவி டாதகொ டிற்றின
கொள்ளி கொண்டிரண் டேமுழை யுட்புகின்
   குன்று தோன்றுவ போலவி ழிப்பன.

முதுகு, உந்தி இயல்பு கூறியது

139.	வற்ற லாகஉ லர்ந்தமு துகுகள்
 	   மரக்க லத்தின்ம றிபுற மொப்பன
ஒற்றை வான்தொளைப் புற்றெனப் பாம்புடன்
   உடும்பு முட்புக்கு றங்கிடும் உந்திய .

உடல், மயிர், மூக்கு, செவி இயல்பு கூறியது

140.	பாந்தள் நால்வன போலுமு டல்மயிர்
 	   பாசி பட்டப ழந்தொளை மூக்கின 
ஆந்தை பாந்தியி ருப்பத்து ரிஞ்சில்புக்கு
   அங்கு மிங்குமு லாவுசெ வியன.

பல், தாலி, தலை உதடு இயல்பு கூறியது

141.	கொட்டு மேழியுங் கோத்தன பல்லின
 	   கோம்பி பாம்பிடைக் கோத்தணி தாலிய
தட்டி வானைத்த கர்க்குந் தலையின
   தாழ்ந்து மார்பிடைத் தட்டும்உ தட்டின.

பேய்க்குழவிகளின் இயல்பு கூறியது

142.	அட்ட மிட்டநெ டுங்கழை காணில்என்
 	   அன்னை யன்னையென் றாலுங்கு ழவிய
ஒட்ட வொட்டகங் காணில்என் பிள்ளையை்
   ஒக்கு மொக்குமென் றொக்கலை கொள்வன.

பேயின் பசி இயல்பு கூறியது

143.	புயல ளிப்பன மேலும ளித்திடும்
 	   பொற்க ரத்தப யன்புலி பின்செலக் 
கயலொ ளித்தக டுஞ்சுரம் போல்அகங்
   காந்து வெம்பசி யிற்புறந் தீந்தவும்.

காளியைச் சூழ்ந்த பேய் இருப்புக் கூறியது

144.	துஞ்ச லுக்கணித் தாமென முன்னமே்
 	   சொன்ன சொன்னது றைதொறும் பேயெலாம்
அஞ்ச லித்தொரு கால்அக லாமலவ்
   வணங்கி னுக்கரு காகவி ருக்கவே.

கால்முடப் பேயைக் கூறியது

145.	ஆளைச் சீறுக ளிற்றப யன்பொரூஉம்
 	   அக்க ளத்தில்அ ரசர்சி ரஞ்சொரி
மூளைச் சேற்றில்வ ழுக்கிவி ழுந்திட
   மொழிபெ யர்ந்தொரு கான்முட மானவும்.

கைம்முடப் பேயைக் கூறியது

146.	அந்த நாளக்க ளத்தடு கூழினுக்கு
 	  ஆய்ந்த வெண்பல்ல ரிசியுரற்புக
உந்து போதினிற் போதகக் கொம்பெனும்
   உலக்கை பட்டுவ லக்கைசொற் றானவும்.

குருட்டுப் பேயைக் கூறியது

147.	விருத ராசப யங்கரன் முன்னொர்நாள்
 	  வென்ற சக்கரக் கோட்டத்தி டைக்கொழுங்
குருதி யுங்குட ருங்கலந்து அட்டவெங்
   கூழ்தெ றித்தொரு கண்குரு டானவும்.

ஊமைப்பேயைக் கூறியது

148.	வண்டல் பாய்பொன்னி நாடனை வாழ்த்திமா
 	   மதுரை வெங்களத் தேமது ரிக்கஅட்
டுண்ட கூழொடு நாவுஞ்சு ருண்டுபுக்கு
   உள்வி ழுந்தற ஊமைக ளானவும்

செவிட்டுப் பேயைக் கூறியது

149.	ஆனை சாயவ டுபரி ஒன்றுகைத்து
 	   ஐம்ப டைப்பரு வத்துஅப யன்பொருஞ் 
சேனை வீரர்நின் றார்த்திடும் ஆர்ப்பினில்
   திமிரி வெங்களத் திற்செவி டானவும்.

குறட் பேயைக் கூறியது

150.	பண்டு தென்னவர் சாயஅ தற்குமுன்
 	   பணிசெய் பூதக ணங்கள னைத்தையுங்
கொண்டு வந்தபேய் கூடிய போதில்அக்
   குமரி மாதர்பெ றக்குற ளானவும்.

கூன் பேயைக் கூறியது

151.	பரக்கு போதக்க டாரம ழித்தநாள்
 	   பாய்ந்த செம்புன லாடியும் நீந்தியும்
குரக்கு வாதம்பி டித்தவி தத்தினில்
   குடிய டங்கலுங் கூன்முது கானவும்.

திறந்த விரற்பேயைக் கூறியது

152.	சிங்க ளத்தொடு தென்மது ராபுரி
 	   செற்ற கொற்றவன் வெற்றிகொள் காலையே
வெங்க ளத்தில் அடுமடைப் பேய்க்குலம்
   வேலை புக்குவி ரல்கள் திறந்தவும்

  7. இந்திர சாலம் (153-177)

காளியின் கட்டில்

153.	இவ்வண்ணத்த இருதிறமுந் தொழுதிருப்ப
 	   எலும்பின்மிசைக் குடர்மென் கச்சிற்
செவ்வண்ணக் குருதிதோய் சிறுபூதத்
   தீபக்கால் கட்டி லிட்டே.

கட்டில் மேல் அணை

154.	பிணமெத்தை யஞ்சடுக்கிப் பேயணையை
 	   முறித்திட்டும் தூய வெள்ளை 
நிணமெத்தை விரித்துயர்ந்த நிலாத்திகழும்
   பஞ்சசய னத்தின் மேலே.

காளியின் இருப்பு

155.	கெடாதபடி கெடுஞ்செழியர் கெடும்பொழுதின்
 	   இடும்பிண்டி பாலம் ஏந்தி
இடாகினிகள் இருமருங்கும் ஈச்சோப்பிப்
   பணிமாற இருந்த போழ்தின்.

நெடும்பேய் செய்தி கூறியது

156.	அடல்நாக வெலும்பெடுத்து நரம்பிற் கட்டி
 	   அடித்தடியும் பிடித்துஅமரின் மடிந்த வீரர்
குடர்சூடி நிணச்சட்டை யிட்டு நின்ற
   கோயில்நா யகிநெடும்பேய் கும்பிட்டு ஆங்கே.

நெடும்பேய் காளிக்குக் கூறல்

157.	சுரகுருவின் தூதாகி யமன்பாற் செல்வோன்
 	   துணித்துவைத்த சிரம்அன்று தின்றபேயைச்
சிரம்அரிய வதற்குறவாய் ஒளித்துப் போந்த்
   சிலபேயைத் திருவுள்ளத் தறிதி யன்றே.

ஒரு முதுபேயின் வருகை கூறியது

158.	அப்பேயி னொருமுதுபேய் வந்து நின்றிங்கு
 	   அடியேனை விண்ணப்பஞ் செய்க என்றது 
இப்பேய்இங் கொருதீங்குஞ் செய்த தில்லை
   என்கொலோ திருவுள்ளம் என்னக் கேட்டே.

முதுபேய் காளி திருமுன் அணுகியது கூறியது

159.	அழைக்க வென்றலும் அழைக்க வந்தணுகி
 	   அஞ்சி யஞ்சிஉன தாணையின் 
பிழைக்க வந்தனம்பொ றுத்தெ மக்கருள்செய்
   பெண்ண ணங்கெனவ ணங்கவே.

முதுபேய்க்குக் காளி மொழிந்தது கூறியது

160.	அருத்தி யிற்பிழைநி னைத்த கூளியை
 	   அறுத்த வன்தலைய வன்பெறப் 
பொருத்தி அப்பிழைபொ றுத்த னம்பிழை
   பொறாத தில்லையினி யென்னவே.

முதுபேய் மொழிந்தது கூறியது

161.	உய்ந்து போயினம்உ வந்தெ மக்கருள
 	   ஒன்றோ டொப்பனவொ ராயிரம் 
இந்திர சாலமுள கற்று வந்தனென்
   இருந்து காணெனஇ றைஞ்சியே.

துதிக்கை, யானைத் தலைகளான இந்திரசாலம் கூறியது

162.	ஏற நின்னிருதி ருக்கண் வைத்தருள்செய்
 	   இக்கை யிற்சிலது திக்கைபார் 
மாறி யிக்கையில்அ மைக்க மற்றவை
   மதக்க ரித்தலைகள் ஆனபார்.

யானைத் தலையுடன் குறையுடலும் காட்டிய
இந்திரசாலம் கூறியது

163.	இக்க ரித்தலையிடன் வாயி னின்று உதிர
 	   நீர்குடித்து உருமி டித்தெனக் 
கொக்க ரித்து அலகை சுற்ற மற்றிவை
   குறைத்த லைப்பிணம்மி தப்பபார்.

முதுபேய் பரணிகாட்டத் தொடங்கியது கூறியது

164.	அடக்கம் அன்றிதுகி டக்க எம்முடைய
 	   அம்மை வாழ்கஎன வெம்மைபார!் 
கடக்கம் அன்றபயன் வென்று வென்றிகொள்
   களப்பெ ரும்பரணி இன்றுபார்.

குதிரை, வீரர் ,யானைப்போர் காட்டிய இந்திரசாலம் கூறியது

165.	துஞ்சி வீழ்துரக ராசி பார்! உடல்
 	   துணிந்து வீழ்குறைது டிப்பபார்!
அஞ்சி யோடுமத யானை பார்உதிர
   ஆறு மோடுவன நூறுபார்.

குருதி வெள்ளம் காட்டிய இந்திரசாலம் கூறியது

166.	அற்ற தோளிவைஅ லைப்ப பார்! உவை
 	   யறாத நீள்குடர்மி தப்பபார்
இற்ற தாள்நரியி ழுப்பபார்! அடி
   யிழுக்கு மூளையில்வ ழுக்கல்பார்!

நிணக்களம் காட்டிய இந்திரசாலம் கூறியது

167.	நிணங்கள் பார்! நிணம ணங்க னிந்தன
 	   நிலங்கள் பார்! நிலம்அ டங்கலும்
பிணங்கள் பார்! இவைகி டக்க நம்முடைய
   பேய லாதசில பேய்கள் பார்!

இந்திரசாலம் கண்ட பேய்நிலை கூறியது

168.	என்ற போதில் இவை மெய்யெ னாஉட
 	   னிருந்த பேய்பதறி ஒன்றன் மேல்
ஒன்று கான்முறிய மேல்வி ழுந்தடிசில்்
   உண்ண எண்ணிவெறு மண்ணின்மேல்

இதுவும் அது

169.	விழுந்துகொ ழுங்குரு தீப்புனல் என்று
 	   வெறுங்கைமு கந்துமுகந்து
எழுந்துவி ழுந்தசை யென்றுநி லத்தை
   இருந்துது ழாவிடுமே.

இதுவும் அது

170.	சுற்றநி ணத்துகில் பெற்றனம் என்று
 	   சுலாவுவெ றுங்கையவே
அற்றகு றை த்தலை யென்றுவி சும்பை
   அதுக்குமெ யிற்றினவே.

இதுவும் அது

171.	கயிற்றுறி யொப்பதொர் பேய்வறி தேஉடல்
 	   கௌவின தொக்கவிரைந்து
எயிற்றைய துக்கிநி லத்திடை பேய்கள்
   இரைத்தன மேல்விழவே.

அப்பேய்நிலை கண்ட யோகினி இயல்பு கூறியது

172.	முறம்பல போலந கங்கண்மு றிந்து
 	   முகஞ்சித றாமுதுகுந்
திறம்பிவி லாவிற யோகினி மாதர்
   சிரித்துவி லாஇறவே.

பேய்கள் இந்திரசாலத்தை நிறுத்த மொழிந்தது கூறியது

173.	அக்கணம் ஆளும்அ ணங்கினை வந்தனை
 	   செய்துக ணங்களெலாம்
இக்கண மாளும்இ னித்தவிர் விச்சை்
   எனக்கைவி திர்த்தலுமே.

முதுபேய் காளியிடம் மொழிந்தது கூறியது

174.	கொற்றவர்கோன் வாளபயன் அறிய வாழுங்
 	    குவலயத்தோர் கலையனைத்துங் கூற ஆங்கே
கற்றுவந்தார் கற்ற அவன் காணு மாபோல்
    கடைபோகக் கண்டருள்என் கல்வி யென்றே.

இந்திரசாலம் நிறுத்தியது கூறியது

175.	வணங்குதலும் கணங்களெலாம் மாயப் பாவி
 	      மடுத்தெம்மை மறுசூடு சுடுவை யாகில்
அணங்கரசின் ஆணைஎன வணங்கும் இப்போது
    அவைதவிர்எங் கிவைகற்றா யென்ன ஆங்கே.

முதுபேய் வரலாறு கூறியது

176.	நின்முனிவும் சுரகுருவின் முனிவும்அஞ்சி
 	    நிலையரிதென்று இமகிரிபுக் கிருந்தேற்கு ஒளவை
தன்முனிவு மவன்முனிவுந் தவிர்க என்று
    சாதனமந் திரவிச்சை பலவுந் தந்தே.

இதுவும் அது

177.	உன்னுடைய பழவடியா ரடியாள் தெய்வ
 	    உருத்திரயோ கினியென்பாள் உனக்கு நன்மை
இன்னமுள கிடைப்பனஇங் கிருக்க என்ன
    யானிருந்தேன் சிலகாலம் இருந்த நாளில்.
--------------
   8. இராச பாரம்பரியம்  (178-211)   

கரிகாலன் இமயத்தில் புலிக்குறி பொறித்தது கூறியது      

178.	செண்டு கொண்டுகரி காலனொரு காலின் இமயச்
 	   சிமய மால்வரைதி ரித்தருளிமீள அதனைப்
பண்டு நின்றபடி நிற்கஇது வென்று முதுகில்
   பாய்பு லிக்குறிபொறித்து அதும றித்தபொழுதே.    

நாரதர், கரிகாலனை அணுகி மொழிந்தது கூறியது

179.	கால மும்மையுமு ணர்ந்தருளு நார தனெனும்
 	    கடவுள் வேதமுனி வந்துகடல் சூழ்பு வியில்நின்
போலு மன்னருள ரல்லர் என வாசி புகலாப்
    புகல்வ தொன்றுளது கேளரச என்று புகல்வான

இதுவும் அது

180.	பண்டு பாரதமெ னுங்கதைப ராச ரன்மகன்
 	    கர வெங்கரிமு கன்பரும ருப்பை யொருகைக்
கொண்டு மேருசிக ரத்தொருபு றத்தி லெழுதிக்
    குவல யம்பெறுத வப்பயனு ரைப்ப வரிதால்.  

நாரதர், இராசபாரம்பரியம் கூறத்தொடங்கியது கூறியது

181.	பாரதத்தினுள வாகியப வித்ர கதையெம்
 	    பரம னற்சரிதை மெய்ப்பழைய நான்ம றைகளே
நேரதற்கு இதனை நான்மொழிய நீயெழுதி; முன்
    நெடிய குன்றின்மிசை யேயிசைவ தான கதைகேள்.

மறையின் இயல்பு கூறியது

182.	அதன்மு தற்கண்வரு மாதிமுதன் மாய னிவனே
 	   அப்ர மேயமெனு மெய்ப்ரியம தாக வுடனே
பதமு மிப்பதம்வ குக்கவரு பாத மதுவும்
   பாத மான சில பார்புகழ வந்த வவையும்.

இதுவும் அது

183.	அந்த முட்படவி ருக்குமவ்வி ருக்கின் வழியே
 	   ஆகி வந்ததவ்வ ருக்கமும் வருக்க முழுதும்
வந்த வட்டகமும் ஒட்டரிய சங்கி தைகளும்
   வாய்மை வேதியர்க டாம்விதியெ னும்வ கையுமே.

திருமாலே அபயனாவனென்பது கூறியது

184.	கமல யோனிமுத லாகவருமுங்கண் மரபிற்
 	     காவன் மன்னவர்க ளாகிவரு கின்ற முறையால்
அமல வேதமிது காணும்இதி லார ணநிலத்து
     அமல னேயபய னாகஅறி கென்ற ருளியே. 

நாரதர், இராசபாரம்பரியம் கூறிச்சென்றது கூறியது

185.	அரணி வேள்வியில கப்படும கண்ட வுருவாய்
 	     அரவ ணைத்துயிலு மாதிமு தலாக அபயன்
தரணி காவலள வுஞ்செலமொ ழிந்து முனிவன்
     தானெ ழுந்தருள மாமுனிமொ ழிந்த படியே. 

திருமால், நான்முகன், மரீசி, காசிபன், ஞாயிறு
வழிமுறை கூறியது

186.	ஆதி மால்அமல நாபிகம லத்து அயனுதித்து
 	     அயன்ம ரீசியெனு மண்ணலைய ளித்த பரிசும்
காதல் கூர்தரும ரீசிமக னாகி வளரும்
     காசி பன்கதிர் அருக்கனைய ளித்த பரிசும்

மனு, இக்குவாகு சிறப்புக் கூறியது

187.	அவ்வ ருக்கன்மக னாகிமனு மேதி னிபுரந்து
 	     அரிய காதலனை ஆவினது கன்று நிகரென்று
எவ்வ ருக்கமும்வி யப்பமுறை செய்த பரிசும்,
     இக்கு வாகுஇவன் மைந்தனென வந்த பரிசும். 

ககுத்தன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

188.	இக்கு வாகுவின்ம கன்புதல்வ னான உரவோன்
 	     இகலு வோன் இகலு ரஞ்செய்துபு ரந்த ரனெனும்
சக்கு வாயிரமு டைக்களிறு வாகனமெனத்
     தானி ருந்துபொரு தானவரை வென்ற சயமும்.  

மாந்தாதா, முசுகுந்தன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

189.	ஒருது றைப்புனல்சி னப்புலியும் மானுமுடனே
 	     உண்ண வைத்தவுர வோனுலகில் வைத்த அருளும்
பொருது றைத்தலைபு குந்துமுசு குந்தன் இமையோர்
     புரம டங்கலும ரண்செய்துபு ரந்த புகழும். 

பிருதுலாட்சன், சிபிச் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

190.	கடல்க லக்கவெழு மின்னமுது தன்னை யொருவன்
 	    கடவுள் வானவர்க ளுண்ண அருள் செய்தகதையும்
உடல்க லக்கறஅ ரிந்துதசை யிட்டும் ஒருவன்
    ஒருது லைப்புறவொடு ஒக்கநிறை புக்க புகழும்.

சுராதிராசன், இராசகேசரி, பரகேசரி சிறப்புக் கூறியது

191.	சுராதி ராசன்முத லாகவரு சோழன் முனநாள்
 	    சோழ மண்டல மமைத்தபிற கேழுலகையும்
இராச கேசரிபு ரந்துபர கேச ரிகளாம்
    இருவ ராணைபுலி யாணையென நின்ற புகழும்.

கிள்ளிவளவன், கவேரன் இராசேந்திரமிருத்யுசித்துசிறப்புக் கூறியது

192.	கால  னுக்கிதுவ  ழுத்கெனவு ரைத்த வவனும்
    காவி ரிப்புனல்கொ ணர்ந்தவவ னும்பு வனியின்
மேல னைத்துயிரும் வீவதிலை யாக நமன்மேல்
    வென்றி கொண்டவனு மென்றிவர்கள் கொண்டவிறலும்.

சித்திரன், சமுத்திரசித்து பஞ்சபன் முதலியோர்சிறப்புக் கூறியது   

193.	புலியெ னக்கொடியி லிந்திரனை வைத்த வவனும்
 	    புணரி யொன்றினிடை யொன்றுபுக விட்டவவனும்
வலியி னிற்குருதி உண்கெனவ ளித்த வவனும்
    வாத ராசனைவ லிந்துபணி கொண்ட வவனும்

தூங்கெயில் எறிந்தோன், உபரிசரன் முதலியோர்சிறப்புக் கூறியது

194	தூங்கு மூன்றெயி லெறிந்தவவ னுந்தி ரண்மணிச்
 	    சுடர்வி மானமது வான்மிசையு யர்த்த வவனும்
தாங்கள் பாரதமு டிப்பளவுநின்று தருமன்
    தன்க டற்படைத னக்குதவி செய்த வவனும்.

கிள்ளிவளவன், செங்கணான் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

195.	தளவ ழிக்குநகை வேல்விழிபி லத்தின் வழியே
 	    தனிந டந்துரகர் தங்கண்மணி கொண்ட வவனும்
களவ ழிக்கவிதை பொய்கையுரை செய்ய உதியன்
    கால்வ ழித்தளையை வெட்டியர சிட்ட வவனும்.

கரிகாலன், சேரபாண்டியர்களை வென்றது கூறியது

196.	என்று மற்றவர்கள் தங்கள்சரி தங்கள் பலவும்
 	    எழுதி மீளஇதன் மேல்வழுதி சேரன் மடியத்
தன்த னிக்களிற ணைந்தருளி வீர மகள்தன்
    தனத டங்களொடு தன்புயம ணைந்த பரிசும்.

கரிகாலன், பிரதாபருத்திரன் கண்கொண்டது கூறியது

197.	தொழுது மன்னரே கரைசெய் பொன்னியில்
 	    தொடர வந்திலா முகரி யைப்படத்து
எழுது கென்றுகண் டிதுமி கைக்கணென்று
    இங்க ழிக்கவே அங்க ழிந்ததும்,

கரிகாலன், பட்டினப்பாலை கொண்டது கூறியது

198	தத்து நீர்வரால் குருமி வென்றதுந்
 	   தழுவு செந்தமிழ்ப் பரிசில் வாணர்பொன்
பத்தொ டாறுநூ றாயி ரம்பெறப்
   பண்டு பட்டினப் பாலை கொண்டதும்,

கரிகாலன், சேர பாண்டியரை மானக்கேடு செய்தது கூறியது

199	ஒருவர் முன்னோர்நாள் தந்து பின்செலா
 	   உதியர் மன்னரே மதுரை மன்னரென்று
இருவர் தம்மையும் கிழிகள் சுற்று வித்து
   எரிவி விளக்குவைத்து இகல்வி ளைத்ததும்.

பராந்தகன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

200.	வேழ மொன்றுகைத்து ஆலி விண்ணின்வாய்
 	   விசைய டங்கவும் அசைய வென்றதும்
ஈழ முந்தமிழ்க் கூட லுஞ்சிதைந்து
   இகல் கடந்தோர் இசை பரந்ததும்,

இராசராசசோழன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

201.	சதய நாள்விழா உதியர் மண்டலம்
 	   தன்னில் வைத்தவன் தனியொர் மாவின்மேல்
உதய பானுவொத்து உதகை வென்றகோன்
   ஒருகை வாரணம் பலக வர்ந்ததும்,

இராசேந்திர சோழன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

202.	களிறு கங்கைநீ ருண்ண மண்ணையில்
 	   காய்சி னத்தொடே கலவு செம்பியன்
குளிறு தெண்டிரைக் குரைக டாரமும்
   கொண்டு மண்டலம் குடையுள் வைத்ததும்,

இராசாதிராசன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

203.	கம்பி லிச்சயத் தம்ப நட்டதும்
 	   கடிய ரண்கொள்கல் யாணர் கட்டறக்
கிம்பு ரிப்பணைக் கிரியு கைத்தவன்
   கிரிக ளெட்டினும் புலிபொ றித்ததும்

இராசேந்திரதேவன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

204.	ஒருக ளிற்றின்மேல் வருக ளிற்றையொத்து
 	   உலகு யக்கொளப் பொருது கொப்பையிற்
பொருக ளத்திலே முடிக வித்தவன்
   புவிக விப்பதோர் குடைக வித்ததும்.

இராசமகேந்திரன் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

205.	பனுவலுக்கு முதலாய வேத நான்கில்
 	    பண்டுரைத்த நெறிபுதுக்கிப் பழையர் தங்கண்
மனுவி னுக்கு மும்மடி நான் மடியாஞ் சோழன்
   மதிக்குடைக்கீ ழறந்தளிர்ப்ப வளர்ந்த வாறும்,

முதற்குலோத்துங்கன் தோற்றம் கூறியது

206.	குந்தளரைக் கூடற்சங் கமத்துவென்ற
 	    கோனபயன் குவலயங்காத் தளித்த பின்னை
இந்தநிலக் குலப்பாவை இவன்பாற் சேர
  என்ன தவஞ் செய்திருந்தாள் என்னத் தோன்றி.

குலோத்துங்கன் வெற்றிச் சிறப்புக் கூறியது

207.	எவ்வளவு திரிபுவன முளவாய்த் தோன்றும்
 	    எவ்வளவு குலமறைக ளுளவாய் நிற்கும்
அவ்வளவு திகிரிவரை யளவுஞ் செங்கோல்
  ஆணைசெல்ல வபயன் காத் தளிக்கு மாறும்.

கரிகாலன் இமயத்தில் எழுதி முடித்தது கூறியது

208.	இப்பு றத்திமய மால்வரையின் மார்பி னகலத்து
 	    எழுதி னானெழுது தற்கரிய வேத மெழுதி
ஒப்பு றத்தனது தொன்மரபு மம்ம ரபின்மேல்
  உரைசெய் பல்புகழுமொன் றுமொழி யாதபரிசே.

முதுபேய் சொல்லி முடித்ததும் காளி வியந்ததும் கூறியது

209.	எழுதி மற்றுரைசெய் தவரவர்கள் செய்பி ழையெலாம்
 	    எமர்பொ றுக்கஎன விப்படிமு டித்த இதனைத்
தொழுது கற்றனம் எனத்தொழுது சொல்லு மளவில்
  சோழ வம்சமிது சொன்ன அறிவென்ன வழகோ?

காளி குலோத்துங்கனை நினைந்து மகிழ்தல் கூறியது      

210.	வையகமாங் குலமடந்தை மன்னபயன்
 	    தன்னுடைய மரபு கேட்டே
ஐயனையான் பெற்றெடுத்த அப்பொழுதும்
  இப்பொழுதொத் திருந்த தில்லை.

காளி குலோத்துங்கனைப் புகழ்தல்      

211.	உலகையெலாங் கவிக்கின்ற ஒருகவிகைச்
 	   சயதுங்கன் மரபு கீர்த்தி
அலகையெலாங் காக்கின்ற அம்மைபூ
  தலங்காப்பான் அவனே யென்ன.
--------------
  9. பேய் முறைப்பாடு  (212-231)  

பேய்கள் காளியிடம் தம் மிகுபசி மொழிந்தது கூறியது

212.	ஆறுடைய திருமுடியா னருளுடைய
 	   பெருந்தேவி அபயன் காக்கும்
பேறுடைய பூதமாப் பிறவாமல்
   பேய்களாப் பிறந்து கெட்டேம்.

இதுவும் அது      

213.	ஆர்காப்பா ரெங்களைநீ யறிந்தருளிக்
 	   காப்பதல்லால் அடையப் பாழாம்
ஊர்காக்க மதில்வேண்டா உயிர்காத்த
   உடம்பினைவிட் டோடிப் போதும்.

இதுவும் அது      

214.	ஓய்கின்றேம் ஓய்வுக்கு மினியாற்றேம்
 	   ஒருநாளைக் கொருநாள் நாங்கள்
தேய்கின்ற படிதேய்ந்து மிடுக்கற்றேம்
   செற்றாலும் உய்ய மாட்டோம்.

இதுவும் அது      

215	வேகைக்கு விறகானேம் மெலியா நின்றேம்
 	   மெலிந்தவுடல் தடிப்பதற்கு விரகும் காணேம்
சாகைக்கித் தனையாசை போதும் பாழிற்
  சாக்காடும் அரிதாகத் தந்து வைத்தாய்.

இதுவும் அது      

216	சாவத்தாற் பெறுதுமோ சதுமுகன்றான்
 	   கீழ்நாங்கள் மேனாட் செய்த
பாவத்தா லெம்வயிற்றிற் பசியைத் வைத்தான்
  பாவியேம் பசிக்கொன்று இல்லேம்.

இதுவும் அது

217	பதடிகளாய்க் காற்றடிப்ப நிலைநி லாமற்
 	   பறக்கின்றேம் பசிக்கலைந்து பாதி நாக்கும்
உதடுகளிற் பாதியுந்தின் றொறுவா யானேம்
  உனக்கடிமை யடியேமை யோடப் பாராய்.

இதுவும் அது     

218	அகளங்கன் நமக்கிரங்கான் அரசரிடுந்
 	   திறைக்கருள்வான் அவன்றன் யானை
நிகளம்பூண் டனவடியேம் நெடும்பசியான்
  அறவுலர்ந்து நெற்றாய் அற்றேம்.

இதுவும் அது      

219	மூக்கருகே வழுநாறி முடைநாறி
 	   உதடுகளுந் துடிப்ப வாயை
ஈக்கதுவும் குறியாலுய்ந் திருக்கின்றேம்
  அன்றாகில் இன்றே சாதும்

முதுபேய் கலிங்கத்துக்கண்ட தீநிமித்தம் மொழியத் தொடங்கியது

220.	என்றுபல கூளிகள்
 	   இரைத்துரைசெய் போதத்து
அன்றிமய வெற்பினிடை
  நின்றுவரும் அப்பேய்.

இதுவும் அது      

221.	கைதொழுதி றைஞ்சி அடிப
 	   யேன்வடக லிங்கத்து
எய்தியவி டத்துள
  நிமித்தமிவை கேண்மோ.

இதுவும் அது      

222.	மதக்கரி மருப்பிற மதம்புலரு மாலோ
 	   மடப்பிடி மருட்பெழ மதம்பொழியு மாலோ
கதிர்ச்சுடர் விளக்கொளி கறுத்தெரியு மாலோ
  காலமுகில் செங்குருதி காலவரு மாலோ.

இதுவும் அது

223	வார்முரசி ருந்துவறி தேஅதிரு மாலோ
 	  வந்திரவில் இந்திரவில் வானிலிடு மாலோ
ஊர்மனையில் ஊமனெழ ஓரியழு மாலோ
  ஓமவெரி ஈமவெரி போல்கமழு மாலோ .

இதுவும் அது

224	பூவிரியு மாலைகள் புலால்கமழு மாலோ
பொன்செய்மண மாலைஒளி போயொழியு மாலோ
ஓவியமெ லாம்உடல் வியர்ப்பவரு மாலோ
ஊறுபுனல் செங்குருதி  நாறவரு மாலோ .

கேட்ட காளி மொழியத் தொடங்கியது     

225	எனாவுரைமு டித்ததனை
 	   என்கொல்விளை வென்றே
வினாவுரைத னக்கெதிர்
  விளம்பின ளணங்கே .

இதுவும் அது

226	உங்கள் குறியும் வடகலிங்கத்
 	   துள்ள குறியும் உமக்கழகே
நாங்கள் கணிதப் பேய்கூறும்
  நனவும் கனவும் சொல்லுவோம்.

காளி மொழிந்தது      

227	நிருபரணி வென்ற அகளங்கன்மத
 	   யானைநிக ளங்களொடு நிற்பன வதற்கு
ஒருபரணி யுண்டெனவு ரைத்தன
  உரைப்படி உமக்கிது கிடைக்கு மெனவே.

பரணி உண்டெனக் கேட்ட பேய்நிலை

228	தடித்தனமெ னத்தலைத டித்தனமெனப்பல
 	   தனிப்பனைகு னிப்ப வெனவே
நடித்தனந டிப்பவலி யற்றனகொ டிற்றையு
  நனைத்தனஉ தட்டி னுடனே.

இதுவும் அது      

229	விலக்குகவி லக்குகவி ளைத்தன எனக்களி
 	   விளைத்தன இளைத்த னவிலா
அலக்குகஅ லக்குகஅ டிக்கடிசி ரித்தன
  அயர்த்தனப சித்த பசியே.

இதுவும் அது

230	ஆடியிரைத் தெழுகணங்கள்
 	   அணங்கேயிக் கலிங்கக்கூழ்
கூடியிரைத் துண்டுழியெம்
  கூடாரப் போதுமோ.

காளி பேய்கட்கு மொழிந்தது

231	போதும்போ தாதெனவே
 	   புடைப்படல மிடவேண்டா
ஓதஞ்சூ ழிலங்கைப்போர்க்கு
  ஒட்டிரட்டி கலிங்கப்போர்.
--------------
   10. அவதாரம் (232-311)  

காளி, பேய்களுக்குத் திருமாலே குலோத்துங்கனாகப்
பிறந்தானென மொழிந்தமை

232	அன்றிலங்கை பொருதழித்த அவனே அப்
 	   பாரதப்போர் முடித்துப் பின்னை
வென்றிலங்கு கதிராழி விசயதரன்
   எனஉதித்தான் விளம்பக் கேண்மின்!

திருமால் கண்ணனாகப் பிறந்தது     

233	தேவரெலாங் குறையிரப்பத் தேவகிதன்
 	   திரிவயிற்றில் வசுதே வற்கு
மூவுலகுந் தொழநெடுமால் முன்னொருநாள்
   அவதாரஞ் செய்த பின்னை.

கண்ணன் குலோத்துங்கனாகப் பிறந்தது

234	இருள்முழுது மகற்றும்விது குலத்தோன் தேவி
 	   இகல்விளங்கு தபனகுலத் திராச ராசன்
அருள் திருவின் திருவயிற்றில் வந்து தோன்றி
   ஆலிலையி னவதரித்தா னவனே மீள.

குலோத்துங்கன் பிறந்த சிறப்பு

235	வந்தருளி அவதாரஞ் செய்தலுநம்
 	   மண்ணுலகும் மறைகள் நான்கும்
அந்தரநீங் கினஎன்ன அந்தரதுந்
   துமிமுழங்கி யெழுந்த தாங்கே.

குலோத்துங்கனைப் பாட்டியார் கண்டு மகிழ்ந்தது      

236	அலர்மழைபோல் மழைபொழிய அதுகண்டு
 	   கங்கைகொண்ட சோழன் தேவி
குலமகள்தன் குலமகனைக் கோகனத
   மலர்க்கையான் எடுத்துக் கொண்டே.

பாட்டியார் மொழிந்தது     

237.	அவனிபர்க்குப் புரந்தரனு அடையாளம்
 	   அவயவத்தின் அடைவே நோக்கி
இவனெமக்கு மகனாகி இரவிகுலம்
   பாரிக்கத் தகுவன் என்றே.

இருகுலத்தோரும் மகிழ்ந்தது

238.	திங்களினி ளங்குழவி செம்மலிவ னென்றுஞ்
 	   செய்யபரி திக்குழவி ஐயனிவ னென்றுந்
தங்களின்ம கிழ்ந்திருகு லத்தரசர் தாமுந்
   தனித்தனி உவப்பதொர் தவப்பயனு மொத்தே.

ஐம்படைத்தாலி அணிந்தமை

239.	பண்டுவசு தேவன்மக னாகிநில மாதின்
 	   படர்களையும் மாயனிவ னென்றுதெளி வெய்தத்
தண்டுதனு வாள்பணிலம் நேமியெனு நாமத்
   தன்படைக ளானதிரு ஐம்படைத ரித்தே.

குலோத்துங்கன் நடைபயின்றமை      

240.	சினப்புலிவ ளர்ப்பதொர்  சிறுப்புலியு மொத்தே
திசைக்களிற ணைப்பதொர்  தனிக்களிறு மொத்தே
அனைத்தறமும் ஒக்கஅடி வைக்கஅடி வைத்தே
அறத்தொடும றத்துறை  நடக்கநடை கற்றே.

மழலை மொழிந்தது     

241.	தாயர்தரு பால்முலை சுரக்கவரு நாளே
 	   தானுமுல கத்தவர் தமக்கருள் சுரந்தே
தூயமனு வுஞ்சுருதி யும்பொருள் விளங்கிச்
   சொற்கடெ ரியத்தனது சொற்கடெரி வித்தே.

பூணூல் அணிந்தமை

242.	திருமார்பின் மலர்மடந்தை திருக்கழுத்தின்
 	   மங்கலநா ணென்ன முந்நூற்
பெருமார்பின் வந்தொளிரப் பிறப்பிரண்டா
   வதுபிறந்து சிறந்த பின்னர்.

மறை பயின்றமை

.243.	போதங்கொள் மாணுருவாய்ப் புவியிரந்த
 	   அஞ்ஞான்று புகன்று சென்ற
வேதங்கள் நான்கினையும் வேதியர்பால்
   கேட்டருளி மீண்டு கற்றே.

உடைவாள் ஏந்தல்

244.	நிறைவாழ்வைப் பெறல்தமக்கும் அணித்தென்று
 	   நிலப்பாவை களிப்ப விந்தத்
துறைவாளைப் புயத்திருத்தி உடைவாளைத்
   திருவரையின் ஒளிர வைத்தே.

யானையேற்றம்

245.	ஈரிரும ருப்புடைய வாரணம் உகைத்தே
 	     இந்திரனெ திர்ந்தவரை வென்றுவரு மேயான்
ஓரிரும ருப்புடைய வாரணம் உகைத்தே
     ஒன்னலரை வெல்வனென அன்னதுப யின்றே.

குதிரையேற்றம்

246.	இற்றைவரை யுஞ்செல வருக்கனொரு நாள்போல்
 	     ஏழ்பரியு கைத்திரு ளகற்றிவரு மேயான்
ஒற்றைவய மானடவி இத்தரைவ ளாகத்து
     உற்றவிருள் தீர்ப்பனென மற்றதுப யின்றே.

படைக்கலப் பயிற்சி

247.	சக்கரமு தற்படையொ ரைந்துமுத னாளே
 	     தன்னுடைய ஆனவத னாலவை நமக்குத்
திக்குவிச யத்தின்வரு மென்றவை பயிற்றிச்
     செங்கைமலர் நொந்தில சுமந்தில தனக்கே.

கலைநூற் பயிற்சி

248.	உரைசெய்பல கல்விகளின்உரிமைபல
 	     சொல்லுவதென் உவமையுரை செய்யின் உலகத்து
அரசருள ரல்லரென அவைபுகழ
     மல்குகலை அவையவைகள் வல்ல பிறகே.

இளவரசானமை

249.	இசையுடனெ டுத்தகொடி அபயனவ
 	     னிக்கிவனை இளவரசில் வைத்த பிறகே
திசையரச ருக்குரிய திருவினை
     முகப்பதொரு திருவுளம டுத்தருளியே.

போர்மேற் சென்றமை

250.	வளர்வதொர் பதத்தினிடை மதகரி
 	     முகத்தினிடை வளையுகிர் மடுத்து விளையாடு
இளவரியெ னப்பகைஞர் எதிர்முனைக 
     ளைக்கிழிய எறிபடை பிடித்த ருளியே.

வடவரசரை வெற்றிகொண்டது

251.	குடதிசை புகக்கடவு குரகதர
 	     தந்திரவி குறுகலும் எறிக்கு மிருள்போல்
வடதிசை முகத்தரசர் வருகதமு
     கத்தனது குரகதம் உகைத்த ருளியே.

வயிராகரம் எரிமடுத்தது

252.	புரமெரிம டுத்தபொழுது அதுவிது
 	     வெனத்திகிரி புகையெரிகு விப்ப வயிரா
கரமெரிம டுத்தரசர் கரமெதிர்
     குவிப்பதொரு கடவரைத னைக்க டவியே,  

 களங்கொண்டது     

253.	குளமுதிர மெத்தியதொர் குரைகடல்
 	     கடுப்பஎதிர் குறுகலர்கள் விட்ட குதிரைத்
தளமுதிர வெட்டி ஒரு செருமுதிர
     ஒட்டினர்கள் தலைமலைகு வித்த ருளியே.

சக்கரக் கோட்டம் அழித்தமை

254.	மனுக்கோட்டம் அழித்தபிரான்  
 	     வளவர்பிரான் திருப்புருவத்
தனுக்கோட்ட நமன்கோட்டம்
     பட்டதுசக் கரக்கோட்டம்.

குலோத்துங்கன் விளக்கமும் பகைவர் அழிவும்

255.	சரிக ளந்தொறுந் தங்கள்ச யமகள்
 	     தன்னை மன்னப யன்கைப் பிடித்தலும்
பரிக ளுங்களி றுந்தன ராசியும்
     பாரி போகங்கொ டுத்தனர் பார்த்திபர்.

இதுவும் அது

256.	பொருத ராதிபர் கண்கள் சிவந்தில
 	     போரி லோடிய கால்கள் சிவந்தன
விருத ராச பயங்கரன் செங்கையில்
     வேல்சி வந்தது கீர்த்தி வெளுத்ததே.

வீரராசேந்திரன் இறந்தமை

257.	மாவுகைத் தொருதனி அபயன் இப்படி
 	     வடதிசை மேற்செல மன்னர் மன்னவன்
தேவருக் கரசனாய் விசும்பின் மேற்செலத்
     தென்றிசைக் குப்புகுந் தன்மை செப்புவாம்.

சோழநாடு அரசிழந்த இயல்

258.	மறையவர் வேள்வி குன்றி
 	     மனுநெறி யனைத்தும் மாறித்
துறைகளோ ராறும் மாறிச்
     சுருதியும் முழக்கம் ஓய்ந்தே.

இதுவும் அது

259.	சாதிக ளொன்றோ டொன்று
 	     தலைதடு மாறி யாரும்
ஓதிய நெறியி னில்லாது
     ஒழுக்கமும் மறந்து போயே.

இதுவும் அது

260.	ஒருவரை யொருவர் கைம்மிக்கு
 	     உம்பர்தங் கோயில் சோம்பி
அரிவையர் கற்பின் மாறி
     அரண்களு மழிய ஆங்கே,

குலோத்துங்கன் சோழநாடு எய்தியமை

261.	கலியிருள் பரந்த காலைக்
 	     கலியிருள் கரக்கத் தோன்றும்
ஒலிகடல் அருக்க னென்ன
     உலகுய்ய வந்து தோன்றி,

 நாட்டை நிலைபெறுத்தியது

262.	காப்பெலாம் உடைய தானே
 	     படைப்பதும் கடனாக் கொண்டு
கோப்பெலாம் குலைந்தோர் தம்மைக்
     குறியிலே நிறுத்தி வைத்தே,

குலோத்துங்கன் மங்கலநீராடியது

263.	விரிபுனல் வேலை நான்கும்
 	     வேதங்கள் நான்கு மார்ப்பத்
திரிபுவ னங்கள் வாழ்த்தத்
     திருஅபி டேகஞ் செய்தே,

மறையவர் முடிசூட்டியது

264.	அறைகழலரச ரப்பொழுது
 	     அடிமிசை யறுகெ டுத்திட
மறையவர் முடியெ டுத்தனர்
     மனுநெறி தலையெ டுக்கவே.

முடிபுனை நீர் ஆட்டுதல்

265.	நிரைமணி பலகு யிற்றிய
 	     நெடுமுடி மிசைவி திப்படி
சொரிபுன லிடைமு னைத்தன
     துறைகளின் அறம னைத்துமே.

புலிக்கொடி எடுத்தமை

266.	பொதுவற வுலகு கைக்கொடு
 	     புலிவளர் கொடியெ டுத்தன
அதுமுதற் கொடியெ டுத்தலும்
     அமரர்தம் விழவெ டுக்கவே.

கொற்றக்குடை கவித்தமை

267.	குவிகைகொ டரசர் சுற்றிய
 	     குரைகழல் அபயன் முத்தணி
கவிகையின் நிலவெ றித்தது
     கலியெனு மிருளொ ளித்ததே.

 இதுவும் அது

268.	அரனுறை யும்படி மலைகள்
 	     அடையவி ளங்கின அனையோன்
ஒருதனி வெண்குடை உலகில்
     ஒளிகொள் நலந்தரு நிழலில்.

குலோத்துங்கன் புகழ் மேம்பாடு

269.	அரிதுயி லும்படி கடல்கள்
 	     அடையவி ளங்கின கவினின்
ஒருகரு வெங்கலி கழுவி
     உலவுபெ ரும்புகழ் நிலவில்.

இதுவும் அது

270.	நிழலில டைந்தன திசைகள்
 	     நெறியில டைந்தன மறைகள்
கழலில டைந்தனர் உதியர்
     கடலில டைந்தனர் செழியர்.

இதுவும் அது

271.	கருணையொ டுந்தன துபய
 	     கரமுத வும் பொருள் மழையின்
அரணிய மந்திர வனல்கள்
     அவையுத வும்பெரு மழையே.

இதுவும் அது

272.	பரிசில் சுமந்தன கவிகள்
 	     பகடுசு மந்தன திறைகள்
அரசு சுமந்தன இறைகள்
     அவனி சுமந்தன புயமும்.

இதுவும் அது

273.	விரித்த வாளுகிர்வி ழித்த ழற்புலியை
 	     மீது வைக்கஇம யத்தினைத்
திரித்த கோலில்வளை வுண்டு நீதிபுரி
     செய்ய கோலில்வளை வில்லையே.

இதுவும் அது

274.	கதங்க ளிற்பொருதி றைஞ்சி டாவரசர்
 	     கால்க ளில்தளையு நூல்களின்
பதங்க ளில்தளையு மன்றி வேறொரு
     பதங்க ளில்தளைக ளில்லையே.

இதுவும் அது

275.	மென்க லாபமட வார்கள் சீறடி
 	     மிசைச்சி லம்பொலிவி ளைப்பதோர்
இன்க லாம்விளைவ தன்றி எங்குமொர்
     இகல்க லாம்விளைவ தில்லையே.

குலோத்துங்கன் பொழுது போக்கு

276.	வருசெருவொன் றின்மையினான் மற்போருஞ்
 	     சொற்புலவோர் வாதப் போரும்
இருசிறைவா ரணப்போரும் இகன்மதவா
     ரணப்போரும் இனைய கண்டே,

இதுவும் அது

277.	கலையினொடும் கலைவாணர் கவியினொடும்
 	     இசையினொடும் காதல் மாதர்
முலையினொடும் மனுநீதி முறையினொடும்
     மறையினொடும் பொழுது போக்கி,

    குலோத்துங்கன் பரிவேட்டை யாடப் புறப்பட நினைந்தது

278.	காலாற்றண் டலையுழக்கும் காவிரியின்
 	     கரைமருங்கு வேட்டை யாடிப்
பாலாற்றங் கரைமருங்கு பரிவேட்டை
     ஆடுதற்குப் பயண மென்றே,

நால்வகைச் சேனைகளும் திரண்டமை

279.	முரசறைகென் றருளுதலும் முழுதுலகும்
 	     ஒருநகருட் புகுந்த தொப்பத்
திரைசெய்கடல் ஒலியடங்கத் திசைநான்கின்
     படைநான்கும் திரண்ட ஆங்கே.

குலோத்துங்கன் புறப்பாடு

280.	அழகின்மே லழகுபெற அணியனைத்தும்
 	     அணிந்தருளிக் கணித நூலிற்
பழகினார் தெரிந்துரைத்த பழுதறுநாட்
     பழுதற்ற பொழுதத்து ஆங்கே.

இதுவும் அது

281.	அனக தானமறை வாணர்பலர் நின்று பெறவே
 	     அபய தானம்அப யம்புகுது மன்னர் பெறவே
கனக தானம்முறை நின்றுகவி வாணர் பெறவே
     கரட தானம்மத வாரணமு மன்றுபெறவே.

யானை மேற்கொண்டது

282.	மற்ற வெங்கட களிற்றின் உதயக்கி ரியின்மேல்  
 	     மதிக வித்திட உதித்திடும் அருக்க னெனவே
கொற்ற வெண்குடைக விப்பமிசைகொண்டு கவரிக்
     குலம திப்புடைக வித்தநில வொத்து வரவே.

பல்வகை இயங்களின் முழக்கொலி

283.	ஒருவ லம்புரி தழங்கொலி முழங்கி யெழவே
 	     உடன்மு ழங்குபணி லம்பல முழங்கி யெழவே
பருவம் வந்துபல கொண்டல்கண் முழங்கி யெழவே
     பலவி தங்களொடு பல்லிய முழங்கி யெழவே.

பிறபல ஒலி முழக்கம்

284.	மன்னர் சீர்சய மிகுத்திடை விடாத வொலியும்
 	     மறைவ லாளர்மறை நாள்வயின் வழாதவொலியும்
இன்ன மாகடன் முழங்கிஎழு கின்ற வொலியென்று
     இம்பர் உம்பரறி யாதபரி செங்கு மிகவே.

 ஏழிசை வல்லபி உடனிருந்தமை

285.	வாழி சோழகுல சேகரன் வகுத்த இசையின்
 	   மதுர வாரியென லாகுமிசை மாத ரிதெனா
ஏழு பாருலகொ டேழிசை வளர்க்க வுரியாள்
   யானை மீதுபிரி யாதுட னிருந்து வரவே.

தியாகவல்லி உடன் சென்றமை

286.	பொன்னின் மாலைமலர் மாலைபணி மாறி உடனே
 	   புவனி காவலர்கள் தேவியர்கள் சூழ்பி டிவரச்
சென்னி யாணையுடன் ஆணையைந டத்தும் உரிமைத்
   தியாக வல்லிநிறை செல்விஉடன் மல்கி வரவே.

அரசரும் பெண்களும் சூழ்ந்து வந்தமை

287.	பிடியின் மேல்வரு பிடிக்குல மநேக மெனவே
 	     பெய்வ ளைக்கைமட மாதர்பிடி மீதின் வரவே
முடியின் மேன்முடி நிரைத்துவரு கின்ற தெனவே
     முறைசெய் மன்னவர்கள் பொற்குடை கவித்துவரவே.

அரசரோடு வீரர் சூழ்ந்து வந்தமை

288.	யானை மீதுவரும் யானையு மநேக மெனவே
 	     அடுக ளிற்றின்மிசை கொண்டர சநேகம் வரவே
சேனை மீதுமொரு சேனைவரு கின்ற தெனவே
     தெளிப டைக்கல னிலாவொளி படைத்து வரவே.

முரசு முழக்கும் கொடி வரிசையும்

289.	முகிலின் மேன்முகில் முழங்கிவரு கின்ற தெனவே
 	     மூரி யானைகளின் மேன்முர சதிர்ந்து வரவே
துகிலின் மேல்வரு துகிற்குலமு மொக்கு மெனவே
     தோகை நீள்கொடிகள் மேன்முகி றொடங்கி வரவே.

பெண்கள் தேர்மீது வந்ததும் புழுதி எழுந்ததும்

290.	தேரின் மீதுவரு தேர்களும நேகம் எனவே
 	     செம்பொன் மேகலை நிதம்பநிரை தேரின் வரவே
பாரின் மீதுமொரு பாருளது போலும் எனவே
     படல தூளியு மெழுந்திடையின் மூடி வரவே.

சேனைகளின் செலவு

291.	யானை மேலிளம் பிடியின் மேனிரைத்
 	     திடைய றாதுபோம் எறிக டற்கிணை
சேனை மாகடற் கபய னிம்முறைச்
     சேது பந்தனம் செய்த தொக்கவே.

சிவிகையும் குடையும் சென்ற இயல்பு

292.	நீல மாமணிச் சிவிகை வெள்ளமும்
 	     நித்தி லக்குலக் கவிகை வெள்ளமும்
காலி னான்வரும் யமுனை வெள்ளமும்
     கங்கை வெள்ளமும் காண்மின் என்னவே.

கொடிகள் சென்ற இயல்பு

293.	கெண்டை மாசுணம் உவணம் வாரணம்
 	     கேழல் ஆளிமா மேழி கோழிவில்
கொண்ட ஆயிரம் கொடிநு டங்கவே
     குளிறு வெம்புலிக் கொடிகு லாவவே.

பெண்கள் கூட்டம் பரந்தது

294.	தொடைகள் கந்தரம் புடைகொள் கொங்கைகண்
 	     சோதி வாண்முகம் கோதை யோதிமென்
நடைகள் மென்சொலென்று அடைய வொப்பிலா
     நகைம ணிக்கொடித் தொகைப ரக்கவே.

இதுவும் அது

295.	எங்குமுள மென்கதலி யெங்குமுள
 	     தண்கமுகம் எங்குமுள பொங்கு மிளநீர்
எங்குமுள பைங்குமிழ்கள் எங்குமுள
     செங்குமுதம் எங்குமுள செங்க யல்களே.

இதுவும் அது

296.	ஆறலைத ரங்கமுள அன்னநடை
 	     தாமுமுள ஆலைகமழ் பாகு முளவாய்
வேறுமொரு பொன்னிவள நாடுசய
     துங்கன்முன் விதித்ததுவும் ஒக்கு மெனவே.

உடன்சென்ற யானைக்கூட்டத்தின் காட்சி

297.	வேழநிரை என்றமலை யெங்குமிடை
 	     கின்றஅயில் வென்றிஅப யன்ற னருளால்
வாழஅப யம்புகுது சேரனொடு
     கூடமலை நாடடைய வந்த தெனவே.

இதுவும் அது

298.	அக்கிரிகு லங்கள்விடும் அங்குலியின்
 	     நுண்திவலை அச்செழியர் அஞ்சி விடுமத்
திக்கிலுள நித்திலமு கந்துகொடு
     வீசியொரு தென்றல்வரு கின்றதெனவே.

குலோத்துங்கன் தில்லைக் கூத்தனை வணங்கித்
திருவதிகை யடைந்தது

299.	தென்றிசையி னின்றுவட திக்கின்முகம்
 	     வைத்தருளி முக்கணுடை வெள்ளி மலையோன்
மன்றினட மாடியருள் கொண்டு விடை
     கொண்டதிகை மாநகருள் விட்ட ருளியே.

குலோத்துங்கன் கச்சியடைந்தமை

300.	விட்டஅதி கைப்பதியி னின்றுபய
 	     ணம்பயணம் விட்டுவிளை யாடி அபயன்
வட்டமதி ஒத்தகுடை மன்னர்தொழ
     நண்ணினன்வ ளங்கெழுவுகச்சி நகரே.

இங்ஙனம் கூறும் காளிதிரு முன் கலிங்கத்துப் போர்கண்ட பேய் வந்தமை

301.	என்னுமித நன்மொழி எடுத்திறைவி
 	     சொல்லுவதன் முன்னம்இகல் கண்ட தொருபேய்
தன்னுடைய கால்தனது பின்பட
     மனத்துவகை தள்ளிவர ஓடிவரவே.

கலிங்கப்போர் கண்ட பேய் மொழிந்தது

302.	கலிங்கர் குருதி குருதி
 	     கலிங்கம் அடைய அடைய
மெலிந்த வுடல்கள் தடிமின்
     மெலிந்த வுடல்கள் தடிமின்.

இதுவும் அது

303.	உணங்கல் வயிறு குளிர உவந்து பருக பருக
 	கணங்கள் எழுக எழுக கணங்கள் எழுக எழுக.

இதுவும் அது

304.	என்செயப் பாவி காளிங்
 	     கிருப்பதுஅங் கிருப்ப முன்னே
வன்சிறைக் கழுகும் பாறும்
     வயிறுகள் பீறிப் போன.

இதுவும் அது

305.	வயிறுக ளென்னிற் போதா
 	     வாய்களோ போதா பண்டை
எயிறுக ளென்னிற் போதா
     என்னினும் ஈண்டப் போதும்.

இதுவும் அது

306.	சிரமலை விழுங்கச் செந்நீர்த்
 	     திரைகடல் பருகல் ஆகப்
பிரமனை வேண்டிப் பின்னும்
     பெரும்பசி பெறவும் வேண்டும்.

அதுகேட்ட மற்றைப் பேய்கள் நிலை

307.	என்ற வோசை தஞ்செவிக்
 	     கிசைத்தலும் தசைப்பிணம்
தின்ற போற்ப ருத்துமெய்
     சிரித்துமேல் விழுந்துமே.

இதுவும் அது

308.	ஓகை சொன்ன பேயின் வாயை
 	     ஓடி முத்த முண்ணுமே
சாகை சொன்ன பேய்க ளைத்த
     கர்க்க பற்கள் என்னுமே.

இதுவும் அது

309.	பிள்ளை வீழ வீழ வும்பெ ருந்து ணங்கை கொட்டுமே
 	வள்ளை பாடி ஆடி ஓடி வாவெ னாவ ழைக்குமே.

இதுவும் அது

310.	எனாஉ ரைத்த தேவி வாழி
 	     வாழி யென்று வாழ்த்தியே
கனாஉ ரைத்த பேயி னைக்க
     ழுத்தி னிற்கொ டாடுமே.

கலிங்கத்துப்பேயைக் காளி போர்நிலை வினாயது

311.	ஆடிவரு பேய்களின் அலந்தலை
 	     தவிர்த்தடு பறந்தலை யறிந்த தனினின்
றோடிவரு பேயைஇக லுள்ளபடி
     சொல்கென வுரைத்தன ளுரைத்த ருளவே.
-------------
  11. காளிக்குக் கூளி கூறியது  (312- 403) 

கலிங்கப்போர் உரைத்தற்கருமை

312.	மாவா யிரமும் படக்கலிங்கர்
 	     மடிந்த களப்போர் உரைப்போர்க்கு
நாவா யிரமுங் கேட்போர்க்கு
     நாளா யிரமும் வேண்டுமால்.

இதுவும் அது

313.	ஒருவர்க் கொருவாய் கொண்டுரைக்க
 	     ஒண்ணா தேனும் உண்டாகுஞ்
செருவைச் சிறியேன் விண்ணப்பஞ்
     செய்யச் சிறிது கேட்டருளே.

காஞ்சியின் சிறப்பு

314.	பாரெ லாமுடை யான்அப யன்கொடைப்
    பங்க யக்கரம் ஒப்பெனப் பண்டொர்நாள்காரெ லாமெழுந் 
தேழரை நாழிகைக் காஞ்ச
     னம்பொழி காஞ்சிய தன்கணே.

குலோத்துங்கன் தங்கிய மாளிகை மண்டப இயல்பு

315.	அம்பொன் மேரு வதுகொ லிதுகொலென்
 	     றாயி ரங்கதிர் வெய்யவன் ஐயுறும்
செம்பொன் மாளிகைத் தென்குட திக்கினில்
     செய்த சித்திர மண்டபந் தன்னிலே.

வீற்றிருந்த இடச்சிறப்பு

316.	மொய்த்தி லங்கிய தாரகை வானின்நீள்
 	     முகட்டெ ழுந்த முழுமதிக் கொப்பென
நெய்த்தி லங்கிய நித்திலப் பந்தரின்
     நின்று வெண்குடை ஒன்று நிழற்றவே.

வெண் கொற்றக் குடைக்கீழ் வெண்சாமரை வீச இருந்தமை

317.	மேற்க வித்த மதிக்குடை யின்புடை
 	     வீசு கின்றவெண் சாமரை தன்றிருப்
பாற்க டல்திரை ஓரண் டாங்கிரு
     பாலும் வந்து பணிசெய்வ போலவே.

சிம்மாதனத்தில் இருந்தமை

318.	அங்கண் ஞால மனைத்தும் புயத்தில்வைத்
 	     தாட கக்கிரி யில்புலி வைத்தவன்
சிங்க ஆசனத் தேறி யிருப்பதோர்
     சிங்க ஏறெனச் செவ்வி சிறக்கவே.

வீற்றிருந்த சிறப்பு

319.	பணிப்ப ணத்துறை பார்க்கொரு நாயகன்
 	     பல்க லைத்துறை நாவி லிருந்தவன்
மணிப்ப ணிப்புயத் தேசிங்க வாகனி
     வந்து செந்திரு மாதொ டிருக்கவே.

தேவியர் உடன் இருந்தமை

320.	தரும டங்க முகந்து தனம்பொழி
 	     தன்பு யம்பிரி யாச்சயப் பாவையும்
திரும டந்தையும் போல்பெரும் புண்ணியம்
     செய்த தேவியர் சேவித்தி ருக்கவே.

ஆடல்பாடல் மகளிர் சூழ்ந்திருந்தமை

321.	நாட காதி நிருத்த மனைத்தினும்
 	     நால்வ கைப்பெரும் பண்ணினும் எண்ணிய
ஆடல் பாடலரம்பையர் ஒக்குமவ்
     வணுக்கி மாரு மநேக ரிருக்கவே.

சூதர், மாகதர், மங்கலப்பாடகர் புகழ்ப்பாடல்

322.	சூதர் மாகதர் ஆதிய மாந்தரும்
 	     துய்ய மங்கலப் பாடகர் தாமும்நின்
பாத மாதர ராயவர் கட்கெலாம்
     பைம்பொன் மௌலி எனப்புகழ் பாடவே.

இசைவல்லார் அருகு சூழ்ந்தமை

323.	வீணை யாழ்குழல் தண்ணுமை வல்லவர்
 	     வேறு வேறிவை நூறுவி தம்படக்
காண லாம்வகை கண்டனம் நீயினிக்
     காண்டல் வேண்டு மெனக்கழல் போற்றவே.

குலோத்துங்கன் இசைப்பாடல் கேட்டதும் ஆராய்ந்து குற்றங் கண்டதும்

324.	தாள மும்செல வும்பிழை யாவகை
 	     தான்வ குத்தன தன்னெதிர் பாடியே
காள மும்களி றும்பெறும் பாணர்தம்
     கல்வி யில்பிழை கண்டனன் கேட்கவே.

சிற்றரசர்கள் குடைபிடித்துச் சாமரை வீசியது

325.	வெங்க ளிற்றிலி ழிந்தபின் வந்தடி
 	     வீழ்ந்த மன்னவர் வெந்நிடு முன்இடு
தங்கள் பொற்குடை சாமரம் என்றிவை
     தாங்கள் தங்கரத் தால்பணி மாறவே.

சிற்றரசர் தேவிமார் சேடியராய் இருந்தமை

326.	தென்ன ராதிந ராதிப ரானவர்
 	     தேவி மார்கள்தன் சேடிய ராகவே
மன்ன ராதிபன் வானவ ராதிபன்
     வந்தி ருந்தனன் என்னஇ ருக்கவே.

மன்னர்கள் புறத்தே இருக்க, அகத்தே
அமைச்சரோடு இருந்தமை

327.	மண்ட லீகரும் மாநில வேந்தரும்
 	     வந்து ணங்கு கடைத்தலை வண்டைமன்
தொண்டை மான்முதல் மந்திரப் பாரகர்
     சூழ்ந்து தன்கழல் சூடி இருக்கவே.

மன்னர்கள் ஆணைபெற்று உள்புகுந்தமை

328.	முறையி டத்திரு மந்திர வோலையாள்
 	     முன்வ ணங்கி முழுவதும் வேந்தர்தம்
திறையி டப்புற நின்றனர் என்றலும்
     செய்கை நோக்கிவந் தெய்தி யிருக்கவே.

ஆங்குவந்து - சூழ்ந்த அரசர்கள்

329.	தென்னவர் வில்லவர் கூபகர்
 	     சாபகர் சேதிபர் யாதவரே
கன்னடர் பல்லவர் கைதவர்
     காடவர் காரிபர் கோசலரே.

இதுவும் அது

330.	கங்கர் கராளர் கவிந்தர்
 	     துமிந்தர் கடம்பர் துளும்பர்களே
வங்கரி லாடர்ம ராடர்
     விராடர் மயிந்தர் சயிந்தர்களே.

331	சிங்களர் வங்களர் சேகுணர்
 	     சேவணர் செய்யவ ரையணரே
கொங்கணர் கொங்கர்கு லிங்கர்
     சவுந்தியர் குச்சரர் கச்சியரே.

332.	வத்தவர் மத்திரர் மாளுவர்
 	     மாகதர் மச்சர் மிலேச்சர்களே
குத்தர்கு ணத்தர் வடக்கர்
     துருக்கர் குருக்கர் வியத்தர்களே.

வந்த அரசர் செய்கை

323.	எந்நக ரங்களும் நாடு
 	     மெமக்கருள் செய்தனை எம்மையிடச்
சொன்னத னங்கள் கொணர்ந்தனம்
     என்றடி சூடுக ரங்களொடே.

இட்ட திறை

334.	ஆரம் இவைஇவை பொற்கலம் ஆனை இவைஇவை ஒட்டகம்
ஆடல் அயமிவை மற்றிவை  ஆதி முடியொடு பெட்டகம்
ஈர முடையன நித்திலம்  ஏறு நவமணி கட்டிய
ஏக வடமிவை மற்றிவை  யாதும் விலையில்ப தக்கமே.

இதுவும் அது

335.	இவையும் இவையும்ம ணித்திரள் இனைய இவைகன கக்குவை
இருளும் வெயிலும்எ றித்திட  இலகு மணிமக ரக்குழை
உவையும் உவையும்இ லக்கணம்  உடைய பிடிஇவை உட்பக
டுயர்செய் கொடிஇவை மற்றிவை உரிமை அரிவையர் பட்டமே.

இதுவும் அது

336.	ஏறி யருள வடுக்குமிந் நூறு களிறு மிவற்றெதிர்
 	     ஏனை யரச ரொருத்தரோ ரானை யிடுவ ரெனிற்புவ
மாறி அருள அவர்க்கிடை யாமும் இசைவம் எனப்பல
     மான அரசர் தனித்தனி வாழ்வு கருதி உரைப்பரே.

திறைபெற்ற குலோத்துங்கன் வினாயது

337.	அரசர் அஞ்சலென அடியி ரண்டுமவர்
 	     முடியின் வைத்தருளி அரசர்மற்
றுரைசெ யுந்திறைகள் ஒழிய நின்றவரும்
     உளர்கொ லென்றருளு பொழுதிலே.

வினாயதற்கு மறுமொழி

338.	கடவ தந்திறைகொ டடைய வந்தரசர்
 	     கழல்வ ணங்கினர்கள் இவருடன்
வடக லிங்கர்பதி யவனி ரண்டுவிசை
     வருகி லன்திறைகொ டெனலுமே.

அதுகேட்ட குலோத்துங்கன் நிலை

339.	உறுவ தென்கொலென நிலைகு லைந்தரசர்
 	     உயிர்ந டுங்கஒளிர் பவளவாய்
முறுவல் கொண்டபொருள் அறிகி லம்சிறிதும்
     முனிவு கொண்டதிலை வதனமே.

குலோத்துங்கன் இட்ட கட்டளை

340.	எளியன் என்றிடினும் குன்றரணம்
 	     இடிய நம்படைஞர் கடிதுசென்
றனிய லம்புமத மலைகள் கொண்டணைமின்
     அவனை யுங்கொணர்மின் எனலுமே.

கருணாகரத் தொண்டைமான் போர்க்ெகழுந்தமை

341.	இறைமொ ழிந்தளவில் எழுக லிங்கமவை
 	     எறிவ னென்றுகழல் தொழுதனன்
மறைமொ ழிந்தபடி மரபின் வந்தகுல
     திலகன் வண்டைநகர் அரசனே.

தொண்டைமான் விடை கொண்டது

342.	அடைய அத்திசைப் பகைது கைப்பனென்
 	     றாசை கொண்டடல் தொண்டைமான்
விடையெ னக்கெனப் புலியு யர்த்தவன்
     விடைகொ டுக்கஅப் பொழுதிலே.

படை திரண்டது

343.	கடல்க லக்கல்கொல் மலையி டித்தல்கொல்
 	     கடுவி டப்பொறிப் பணபணிப்
பிடரொ டித்தல்கொல் படைநி னைப்பெனப்
     பிரள யத்தினில் திரளவே.

படையின் முழக்கொலி

344.	வளைக லிப்பவும் முரசொ லிப்பவும்
 	     மரமி ரட்டவும் வயிரமாத்
தொளையி சைப்பவும் திசையி பச்செவித்
     தொளைய டைத்தலைத் தொடரவே.

படை நெருக்கம்

345.	குடைநி ரைத்தலின் தழைநெ ருக்கலின்
 	     கொடிவி ரித்தலின் குளிர்ச துக்கமொத்
திடைநி ரைத்தலின் பகல்க ரப்பவுய்த்
     திருநி லப்பரப் பிருள்ப ரக்கவே

இதுவும் அது

346.	அலகில் கட்டழல் கனல்வி ரித்தலால்
 	     அரிய பொற்பணிக் கலனெ றித்தலால்
இலகு கைப்படை கனல்வி ரித்தலால்
     இருள்க ரக்கவே ஒளிப ரக்கவே.

இதுவும் அது

347.	அகில வெற்புமின் றானை யானவோ
 	     அடைய மாருதம் புரவி யானவோ
முகில னைத்துமத் தேர்க ளானவோ
     மூரி வேலைபோர் வீர ரானவோ.

இதுவும் அது

348.	பார்சி றுத்தலிற் படைபெ ருத்ததோ
 	     படைபெ ருத்தலிற் பார்சி றுத்ததோ
நேர்செ றுத்தவர்க் கரிது நிற்பிடம்
     நெடுவி சும்பலால் இடமு மில்லையே.

படையின் செயல்

349.	எனவெ டுத்துரைத் ததிச யித்துநின்
 	     றினைய மண்ணுளோர் அனைய விண்ணுளோர்
மனந டுக்குறப் புறம்ம றைத்தவான்
     மாதி ரங்களைச் சாது ரங்கமே.

யானைப்படையின் சிறப்பு

350.	கடல்க ளைச்சொரி மலையுள எனஇரு
 	     கடத டத்திடை பொழிமத முடையன
கனல்வி ளைப்பன முகிலுள எனவிழி
     கனல்சி னத்தன கரியொடு பரிகளின்.
உடல்பி ளப்பன பிறைசில வுளஎன
     உயர்ம ருப்பின உலகுகள் குலைதர
உருமி டிப்பன வடவனல் உளவென
     ஒலிமு கிற்கட கரிகளும் மிடையவே.

குதிரைப் படையின் சிறப்பு

351.	முனைகள் ஒட்டினர் முடியினை யிடறுவ
 	     முடியின் முத்தினை விளைபுக ழெனநில
முதுகில் வித்துவ நிலமுறு துகளற
     முகின்மி திப்பன முகில்விடு துளியொடு
கனைக டற்றிரை நிரையென விரைவொடு
     கடலி டத்தினை வலமிடம் வருவன
கடலி டத்திறும் இடியென அடியிடு
     கவன மிக்கன கதழ்பரி கடுகவே.

தேர்ப்படையின் சிறப்பு

352.	இருநி லத்திடர் உடைபடு முருளன
 	     இருபு டைச் சிற குடையன முனைபெறின்
எதிர்ப றப்பன விடுநுக மொடுகடி
     திவுளி முற்படின் இதுபரி பவமெனும்
ஒருநி னைப்பினை உடையன வினையன
     உயர்செய் மொட்டொடு மலரென நிறுவிய
ஒழித ரச்செரு உறுபுனல் உமிழ்வன
     உலக ளப்பன இரதமும் மருவியே.

காலாட்படையின் சிறப்பு

353.	அலகில் வெற்றியும் உரிமையு மிவையென
 	     அவய வத்தினில் எழுதிய அறிகுறி
அவையெ னப்பல வடுநிரை யுடையவர்
     அடிபு றக்கிடில் அமரர்தம் உலகொடிவ்
	உலகு கைப்படும் எனினும தொழிபவர்
 	     உடல்ந மக்கொரு சுமையென முனிபவர்
உயிரை விற்றுறு புகழ்கொள உழல்பவர்
     ஒருவ ரொப்பவர் படைஞர்கள் மிடையவே.

வீரரின் ஆரவாரம்

354.	விழித்த விழிதனி விழித்த விருதர்கள்
 	     விடைத்து வெடுவெடு சிரித்தவாய்
தெழித்த பொழுதுடல் திமிர்க்க இமையவர்
     திகைக்கண் மதகரி திகைக்கவே.

குதிரையின் செயல்

355.	உகத்தின் முடிவினில் உகைத்த கனைகடல்
 	     உவட்டி யெனமுகில் முகட்டின்மேல்
நகைத்த விடுபரி முகக்கண் நுரைசுர
     நதிக்கண் நுரையென மிதக்கவே.

யானையின் செயல்

356.	கழப்பில் வெளில்சுளி கதத்தில் இருகவுள்
 	     கலித்த கடம்இடி பொறுத்தபோர்க்
குழப்பி வருமுகில் முழக்கில் அலைகடல்
     குளிக்கும் முகில்களும் இடக்கவே.

தேர்ப்படையின் செயல்

357.	கடுத்த விசையிருள் கொடுத்த வுலகொரு
 	     கணத்தில் வலம்வரு கணிப்பில்தேர்
எடுத்த கொடிதிசை இபத்தின் மதமிசை
     இருக்கும் அளிகளை எழுப்பவே.

போர்க்கெழுந்தது

358.	எழுந்தது சேனை யெழலும்
 	     இரிந்தது பாரின் முதுகு
விழுந்தன கானும் மலையும்
     வெறுந்தரை யான திசைகள்.

இதுவும் அது

359.	அதிர்ந்தன நாலு திசைகள்
 	     அடங்கின ஏழு கடல்கள்
பிதிர்ந்தன மூரி மலைகள்
     பிறந்தது தூளி படலம்.

இதுவும் அது

360.	நிலத்தரு தூளி பருகி
 	     நிறைந்தது வானின் வயிறு
வலந்தரு மேக நிரைகள்
     வறந்தன நீர்கள் சுவறி.

இதுவும் அது

361.	தயங்கொளி ஓடை வரைகள்
 	     தருங்கட தாரை மழையின்
அயங்களின் வாயின் நுரையின்
     அடங்கின தூளி அடைய.

போர்மேற் செலவு

362.	எழுதூ ளியடங் கநடந் துதயத்
 	     தேகுந் திசைகண் டதுமீ ளவிழும்
பொழுதே கலொழிந் துகடற் படையெப்
     பொழுதுந் தவிரா துவழிக் கொளவே.

கருணாகரன் செலவு

363.	தண்ணா ரின்மலர்த் திரள்தோ ளபயன்
 	     தானே வியசே னைதனக் கடையக்
கண்ணா கியசோ ழனசக் கரமாம்
     கருணா கரன்வா ரணமேற் கொளவே.

பல்லவ வேந்தன் செலவு

364.	தொண்டை யர்க்கரசு முன்வ ருஞ்சுரவி
 	     துங்க வெள்விடை யுயர்த்தகோன்
வண்டை யர்க்கரசு பல்ல வர்க்கரசு
     மால்க ளிற்றின்மிசை கொள்ளவே.

வாணகோவரையன் முடிகொண்ட சோழன் செலவு

365.	வாசி கொண்டரசர் வார ணங்கவர
 	     வாண கோவரையன் வாண்முகத்
தூசி கொண்டுமுடி கொண்ட சோழனொரு
     சூழி வேழமிசை கொள்ளவே.

போர்மேற் செல்லல்

366.	மறித்தோடி யெவ்வரசுஞ் சரிய வென்று
 	     வருமனுக்கைப் பல்லவர்கோன் வண்டை வேந்தன்
எறித்தோடை இலங்குநடைக் களிற்றின் மேற்கொண்
     டிரைவேட்ட பெரும்புலிபோல் இகன்மேற் செல்ல.

ஆறுகள் பல கடந்தமை

367.	பாலா றுகுசைத் தலைபொன் முகரிப்
 	     பழவா றுபடர்ந் தெழுகொல் லியெனும்
நாலா றுமகன் றொருபெண் ணையெனும்
     நதியா றுகடந் துநடந் துடனே.

இதுவும் அது

368.	வயலா றுபுகுந் துமணிப் புனல்வாய்
 	     மண்ணா றுவளங் கெழுகுன் றியெனும்
பெயலா றுபரந் துநிறைந் துவரும்
     பேரா றுமிழிந் ததுபிற் படவே.

இதுவும் அது

369.	கோதா வரிநதி மேலா றொடுகுளிர்
 	     பம்பா நதியொடு சந்தப்பேர்
ஓதா வருநதி ஒருகோ தமையுடன்
     ஒலிநீர் மலிதுறை பிறகாக.

கலிங்கம்புகுந்து செய்த செயல்

370.	கடையிற் புடைபெயர் கடலொத் தமரர்
 	     கலங்கும் பரிசுக லிங்கம்புக்
கடையப் படரெரி கொளுவிப் பதிகளை
     அழியச் சூறைகொள் பொழுதத்தே.

கலிங்கர் நிலை

371.	கங்கா நதியொரு புறமா கப்படை
 	     கடல்போல் வந்தது கடல்வந்தால்
எங்கே புகலிடம் எங்கே யினியரண்
     யாரே அதிபதி யிங்கென்றே.

இதுவும் அது

372.	இடிகின் றனமதில் எரிகின் றனபதி
 	     எழுகின் றனபுகை பொழிலெல்லாம்
மடிகின் றனகுடி கெடுகின் றனமினி
     வளைகின் றனபடை பகையென்றே

கலிங்கர் அரசனிடம் முறையிட்டது

373.	உலகுக் கொருமுதல் அபயற் கிடுதிறை
 	     உரைதப் பியதெம தரசேயெம்
பலகற் பனைகளை நினைவுற் றிலைவரு
     படைமற் றவன்விடு படையென்றே.

இதுவும் அது

374.	உரையிற் குழறியும் உடலிற் பதறியும்
 	     ஒருவர்க் கொருவர்முன் முறையிட்டே
அரையிற் றுகில்விழ அடையச் சனபதி
     அடியிற் புகவிழு பொழுதத்தே.

கேட்ட கலிங்க வேந்தன் செயல்

375.	அந்தரமொன் றறியாத வடகலிங்கர்
 	     குலவேந்தன் அனந்த பன்மன்
வெந்தறுகண் வெகுளியினால் வெய்துயிர்த்துக்
     கைபுடைத்து வியர்த்து நோக்கி.

கலிங்க வேந்தன் மொழிந்தது

376.	வண்டினுக்கும் திசையானை மதங்கொடுக்கும்
 	     மலர்க்கவிகை அபயற் கன்றித்
தண்டினுக்கும் எளியனோ எனவெகுண்டு
     தடம்புயங்கள் குலுங்க நக்கே.

இதுவும் அது

377.	கானரணும் மலையரணும் கடலரணும்
 	     சூழ்கிடந்த கலிங்கர் பூமி
தானரண முடைத்தென்று கருதாது
     வருவதுமத் தண்டு போலும்.

அமைச்சன் மொழிந்தது

378.	என்று கூறலும் எங்க ராயனான்
 	ஒன்று கூறுவன் கேளென் றுணர்த்துவான்.

இதுவும் அது

379.	அரசர் சீறுவ ரேனும்அடியவர்
 	உரைசெ யாதொழி யார்க ளுறுதியே.

இதுவும் அது

380.	ஏனை வேந்தை யெறியச் சயதரன்
 	தானை அல்லது தான்வர வேண்டுமோ.

இதுவும் அது

381.	விட்ட தண்டினின் மீனவர் ஐவரும்
 	கெட்ட கேட்டினைக் கேட்டிலை போலுநீ.

இதுவும் அது

382.	போரின் மேற்றண் டெடுக்கப் புறக்கிடும்
 	சேரர் வார்த்தை செவிப்பட்ட தில்லையோ.

இதுவும் அது

383.	வேலை கொண்டு விழிஞ மழித்ததும்
 	சாலை கொண்டதுந் தண்டுகொண் டேயன்றோ.

இதுவும் அது

384.	மாறு பட்டெழு தண்டெழ வத்தவர்
 	ஏறு பட்டது மிம்முறை யேயன்றோ.

இதுவும் அது

385.	தளத்தொ டும்பொரு தண்டெழப் பண்டொர்நாள்
 	அளத்தி பட்டத றிந்திலை யையநீ.

இதுவும் அது

386.	தண்ட நாயகர் காக்கும் நவிலையிற்
 	கொண்ட தாயிரங் குஞ்சர மல்லவோ.

இதுவும் அது

387.	உழந்து தாமுடை மண்டலந் தண்டினால்
 	இழந்த வேந்த ரெனையரென் றெண்ணுகேன்.

இதுவும் அது

388.	கண்டு காணுன் புயவலி நீயுமத
 	தண்டு கொண்டவன் சக்கரம் வந்ததே.

இதுவும் அது

389.	இன்று சீறினும் நாளையச் சேனைமுன்
 	நின்ற போழ்தினில் என்னை நினைத்தியால்.

கேட்ட கலிங்கர்கோன் மொழிந்தது

390.	என்றிவையு ரைத்தலுமெ னக்கெதி
 	     ருரைக்கஇமை யோர்களு நடுங்கு வர்புயக்
குன்றிவைசெ ருத்தொழில் பெறாதுநெடு
     நாள்மெலிவு கொண்டபடி கண்டு மிலையோ.

இதுவும் அது

391.	பிழைக்கவுரை செய்தனைபி ழைத்தனை
 	     யெனக்குறுதி பேசுவது வாசி கெடவோ
முழைக்கண் இள வாளரி முகத்தெளி
     தெனக்களிறு முட்டியெதிர் கிட்டி வருமோ.

இதுவும் அது

392.	என்னுடைய தோள்வலியு மென்னுடைய
 	     வாள்வலியும் யாதுமறி யாது பிறர்போல்
நின்னுடைய பேதைமையி னாலுரைசெய்
     தாய்இதுநி னைப்பளவில் வெல்ல அரிதோ.

கலிங்கர்கோன் போர்மேற் செல்லக் கூறியது

393.	வேழமிர தம்புரவி வெம்படைஞர்
 	     என்றினைய நம்படைவி ரைந்து கடுகச்
சோழகுல துங்கன்விட வந்துவிடு
     தண்டினெதிர் சென்றமர்தொ டங்கு கெனவே.

இதுவும் அது

394.	பண்ணுக வயக்களிறு பண்ணுக
 	     வயப்புரவி பண்ணுக கணிப்பில் பலதேர்
நண்ணுக படைச்செருநர் நண்ணுக
     செருக்கள நமக்கிகல் கிடைத்த தெனவே.

கலிங்கப்படை எழுந்த ஆர்ப்புக் கூறியது

395.	கலிங்கமவை யேழினு மெழுந்ததொரு
 	     பேரொலி கறங்குகட லேழு முடனே
மலங்கியெழு பேரொலி யெனத்திசை
     திகைப்புற வருந்தொனி யெழுந்த பொழுதே.

படை எழுச்சி கூறியது

396.	தொளைமுக மதமலை யதிர்வன
 	     தொடுகடல் பருகிய முகிலெனவே
வளைமுக நுரையுக வருபரி
     கடலிடை மறிதிரை யெனவெழவே.

இதுவும் அது

397.	இடையிடை யரசர்கள் இடுகுடை
 	     கவரிகள் இவைகடல் நுரையெனவே
மிடைகொடி பிறழ்வன மறிகடல்
     அடையவும் மிளிர்வன கயலெனவே.

இதுவும் அது

398.	அலகினொ டலகுகள் கலகல
 	     எனுமொலி அலைதிரை ஒலியெனவே
உலகுகள் பருகுவ தொருகடல்
     இதுவென உடலிய படை எழவே.

இதுவும் அது

399.	விசைபெற விடுபரி இரதமும்
 	     மறிகடல் மிசைவிடு கலமெனவே
இசைபெற உயிரையும் இகழ்தரும்
     இளையவர் எறிசுற வினம் எனவே.

இதுவும் அது

400.	விடவிகள் மொடுமொடு விசைபட
 	     முறிபட வெறிபட நெறிபடவே
அடவிகள் பொடிபட அருவிகள்
     அனல்பட அருவரை துகள்படவே.

இதுவும் அது

401.	அறைகழல் இளையவர் முறுகிய
 	     சினவழல் அதுவட வனலெனவே
முறைமுறை முரசுகள் மொகுமொகு
     வதிர்வன முதிர்கடல் அதிர்வெனவே.

இதுவும் அது

402.	ஒருவர்த முடலினில் ஒருவர்தம்
 	     உடல்புக உறுவதோர் படியுகவே
வெருவர மிடைபடு நடுவொரு
     வெளியற விழியிட அரிதெனவே.

போர்க்கெழுதல் கூறியது

403.	வெளியரி தெனவெதிர் மிடைபடை
 	     மனுபரன் விடுபடை யதனெதிரே
எளிதென இரைபெறு புலியென
     வலியினொ டெடுமெடு மெடுமெனவே.
-------------
    12. போர் பாடியது (404-471) 

போர்த்தொடக்கம்

404.	எடுமெடு மெடுமென வெடுத்ததோர்
 	     இகலொலி கடலொலி இகக்கவே
விடுவிடு விடுபரி கரிக்குழாம்
     விடும்விடு மெனுமொலி மிகைக்கவே.

இதுவும் அது

405.	வெருவர வரிசிலை தெரித்தநாண்
 	     விசைபடு திசைமுகம் வெடிக்கவே
செருவிடை அவரவர் தெழித்ததோர்
     தெழிஉல குகள்செவி டெடுக்கவே.

இருபடைகளும் கைகலந்தமை

406.	எறிகட லொடுகடல் கிடைத்தபோல்
 	     இருபடை களுமெதிர் கிடைக்கவே
மறிதிரை யொடுதிரை மலைத்தபோல்
     வருபரி யொடுபரி மலைக்கவே.

யானைப்படையும் தேர்ப்படையும் மலைந்தமை

407.	கனவரை யொடுவரை முனைத்தபோல்
 	     கடகரி யொடுகரி முனைக்கவே
இனமுகில் முகிலொடு மெதிர்த்தபோல்
     இரதமொ டிரதமும் எதிர்க்கவே.

வீரர்களும் அரசர்களும் மலைந்தமை

408.	பொருபுலி புலியொடு சிலைத்தபோல்
 	     பொருபட ரொடுபடர் சிலைக்கவே
அரியினொ டரியினம் அடர்ப்பபோல்
     அரசரும் அரசரும் அடர்க்கவே.

போரின் கடுமை

409.	விளைகனல் விழிகளின் முளைக்கவே
 	     மினலொளி கனலிடை எறிக்கவே
வளைசிலை யுருமென இடிக்கவே
     வடிகணை நெடுமழை படைக்கவே.

குருதியாற்றியல்பு

410.	குருதியின் நதிவெளி பரக்கவே
 	     குடையினம் நுரையென மிதக்கவே
கரிதுணி படுமுடல் அடுக்கியே
     கரைஎன இருபுடை கிடக்கவே.

யானைப் போர்

411.	மருப்பொடு மருப்பெதிர் பொருப்பிவை
 	     எனப்பொரு மதக்கரி மருப்பி னிடையே
நெருப்பொடு நெருப்பெதிர் சுடர்ப்பொறி
     தெறித்தெழ நிழற்கொடி தழற்க துவவே.

இதுவும் அது

412.	நிழற்கொடி தழற்கது வலின்கடி
 	     தொளித்தவை நினைப்பவர் நினைப்ப தன்முனே
அழற்படு புகைக்கொடி எடுத்தன
     புதுக்கொடி அனைத்தினு நிரைத்த தெனவே.

இதுவும் அது

413.	இடத்திடை வலத்திடை இருத்திய
 	     துணைக்கரம் நிகர்த்தன அடுத்த கரியின்
கடத்தெழு மதத்திடை மடுத்தன
     சிறப்பொடு கறுத்தன அவற்றின் எயிறே.

இதுவும் அது

414.	எயிறுக ளுடையபொ ருப்பைவ லித்திடை
 	     எதிரெதிர் இருபணை இட்டுமு றுக்கிய
கயிறுகள் இவையென அக்கர டக்கரி
     கரமொடு கரமெதிர் தெற்றிவ லிக்கவே.

குதிரைப்படைப் போர்

415.	முடுகிய பவனப தத்திலு கக்கடை
 	     முடிவினில் உலகமு ணச்சுடர் விட்டெழு
கடுகிய வடஅன லத்தினை வைத்தது
     களமுறு துரகக ணத்தின்மு கத்திலே.

யானையொடு பொருவோர் இயல்பு

416.	களமுறு துரகக ணத்தின்மு கத்தெதிர்
 	     கறுவிலர் சிலர்கல வித்தலை நித்தில
இளமுலை எதிர்பொரும் அப்பொழு திப்பொழு
     தெனவெதிர் கரியின்ம ருப்பின்முன் நிற்பரே.

இதுவும் அது

417.	எதிர்பொரு கரியின்ம ருப்பைஉ ரத்தினில்
 	     இறஎறி படையினி றுத்துமி றைத்தெழு
சதுரர்கள் மணியக லத்தும ருப்பவை
     சயமகள் களபமு லைக்குறி ஒத்ததே.

குதிரைவீரர் யானைப்படையை அழித்தமை

418.	சயமகள் களபமு லைக்கணி யத்தகு
 	     தனிவடம் இவையென மத்தக முத்தினை
அயம்எதிர் கடவிம தக்கரி வெட்டினர்
     அலைபடை திரைகள்க ளத்துநி ரைக்கவே.

போர்க்களம் தீயில் மூழ்கியது

419.	அலைபடை நிரைகணி ரைத்தசெ ருக்களம்
 	     அழல்புரி களமென ஒப்பில விற்படை
தலைபொர எரியநெ ருப்பினின் மற்றது
     தழல்படு கழைவனம் ஒக்கினு மொக்குமே.

விற்போர்

420.	தழல்படு கழைவனம் எப்படி அப்படி
 	     சடசட தமரமெ ழப்பக ழிப்படை
அழல்படு புகையொடி ழிச்சிய கைச்சிலை
     அடுசிலை பகழிதொ டுத்துவ லிப்பரே.

வெட்டுண்ட வில்வீரர் இயல்பு

421.	அடுசிலை பகழிதொ டுத்துவி டப்புகும்
 	     அளவினில் அயமெதிர் விட்டவர் வெட்டின
உடல்சில இருதுணி பட்டன பட்டபின்
     ஒருதுணி கருதுமி லக்கைய ழிக்குமே.

அவர் வில்லின் செயல்

422.	ஒருதுணி கருதுமி லக்கைய ழித்தன
 	     உருவிய பிறைமுக அப்பக ழித்தலை
அரிதரி திதுவுமெ னப்பரி யுய்ப்பவர்
     அடியொடு முடிகள் துணித்துவி ழுத்துமே.

குதிரைவீரர் செயல்

423.	அடியொடு முடிகள்து ணித்துவி ழப்புகும்
 	     அளவரி தொடைசம ரத்தொட ணைத்தனர்
நெடியன சிலசரம் அப்படி பெற்றவர்
     நிறைசரம் நிமிரவி டத்துணி யுற்றவே.

குதிரைவீரரால் அழிந்தோர் செயல்

424.	நிறைசரம் நிமிரவி டத்துணி உற்றவர்
 	     நெறியினை ஒடியெறி கிற்பவ ரொத்தெதிர்
அறைகழல் விருதர்செ ருக்கற வெட்டலின்
     அவருடல் இருவகிர் பட்டன முட்டவே.

கலிங்கவீரர் செயல்

425.	விடுத்த வீர ராயு தங்கள்
 	     மேல்வி ழாம ேலநிரைத்
தெடுத்த வேலி போற்க லிங்கர்
     வட்ட ணங்கள் இட்டவே.

கலிங்கர் கேடகங்கள் துளைபட்டமை

426.	இட்ட வட்ட ணங்கண் மேலெ
 	     றிந்த வேல்தி றந்தவாய்
வட்ட மிட்ட நீள்ம திற்கு
     வைத்த பூழை ஒக்குமே.

வாட்படையும் உலக்கைப்படையும்கொண்டு பொருதமை

427.	கலக்க மற்ற வீரர் வாள்க
 	     லந்த சூரர் கைத்தலத்
துலக்கை உச்சி தைத்த போது
     ழுங்க லப்பை ஒக்குமே.

துணிந்து வீழ்ந்த யானைத் துதிக்கைநிலை

428.	மத்த யானை யின்க ரம்சு
 	     ருண்டு வீழ வன்சரம்
தைத்த போழ்தின் அக்க ரங்கள்
     சக்க ரங்க ளொக்குமே.

யானை மத்தகம் பிளந்தமை

429.	வெங்க ளிற்றின் மத்த கத்தின்
 	     வீழு முத்து வீரமா
மங்கை யர்க்கு மங்க லப்பொ
     ரிச்சொ ரிந்த தொக்குமே.

கேடகத்தோடு வீரர் வீழ்ந்த நிலை

430.	மறிந்த கேட கம்கி டப்ப
 	     மைந்தர் துஞ்சி வைகுவோர்
பறிந்த தேரின் நேமி யோடு
     பார்கி டப்ப தொக்குமே.

சக்கரப்படையும் தண்டுப்படையும் பொருதமை

431.	களித்த வீரர் விட்ட நேமி
 	     கண்டு வீசு தண்டிடைக்
குளித்த போழ்து கைப்பி டித்த
     கூர்ம ழுக்க ளொக்குமே.

குறை உடலங்களின் ஆட்டம்

432.	கவந்த மாட முன்பு தம்க
 	     ளிப்பொ டாடு பேயினம்
நிவந்த வாடல் ஆட்டு விக்கு
     நித்த காரர் ஒக்குமே.

யானை குதிரை ஒட்டகம் திரியுநிலை

433.	ஒட்ட கங்கள் யானை வாலு
 	     யர்த்த மாஅ ழிந்தபோர்
விட்ட கன்று போகி லாது
     மீள்வ போலும் மீளுமே.

குருதி வெள்ளத்தில் பட்டு வீழ்ந்த யானையின் இயல்பு

434.	பிறங்கு சோரி வாரி யிற்பி
 	     ளிற்றி வீழ்க ளிற்றினம்
கறங்கு வேலை நீரு ணக்க
     விழ்ந்த மேகம் ஒக்குமே.

யானையின் துதிக்கை துணித்தோர் இயல்பு

435.	வாளில் வெட்டி வார ணக்கை
 	     தோளில் இட்ட மைந்தர்தாம்
தோளில் இட்டு நீர்வி டுந்து
     ருத்தி யாளர் ஒப்பரே.

அம்பு தொளைத்த வில்லோர் இயல்பு

436.	நேர்முனையில் தொடுத்த பகழிகள்
 	     நேர்வளையில் சுழற்று மளவினில்
மார்பிடையில் குளித்த பகழியை
     வார்சிலையில் தொடுத்து விடுவரே.

குதிரையை வீழ்த்திய வீரர் இயல்பு

437.	அசையஉரத் தழுத்தி இவுளியை
 	     அடுசவளத் தெடுத்த பொழுதவை
விசையமகத் தெடுத்த கொடியென
     விருதர்களத் தெடுத்து வருவரே.

தொடை வெட்டுண்ட வீரர் செயல்

438.	இருதொடையற் றிருக்கு மறவர்கள்
 	     எதிர்பொருகைக் களிற்றின் வலிகெட
ஒருதொடையைச் சுழற்றி எறிவர்கள்
     ஒருதொடைஇட் டுவைப்பர் எறியவே.

வாட்போர்

439.	இருவருரத் தின்உற்ற சுரிகையின்
 	     எதிரெதிர்புக் கிழைக்கு மளவினில்
ஒருவரெனக் கிடைத்த பொழுதினில்
     உபயபலத் தெடுத்த தரவமே.

வீரர் யானைவீரரோடு பொருதமை

440.	பொருநர்கள் சிலர்தமு ரத்தி னிற்கவிழ்
 	     புகர்முகம் மிசையடி யிட்ட திற்பகை
விருதரை அரிவர்சி ரத்தை அச்சிரம்
     விழுபொழு தறையெனும் அக்க ளிற்றையே.

படை அற்றோர் குதிரையொடு பொருதமை

441.	விடுபடை பெறுகிலர் மற்றி னிச்சிலர்
 	     விரைபரி விழஎறி தற்கு முற்பட
அடுகரி நுதல்பட விட்ட கைப்படை
     அதனையொர் நொடிவரை யிற்ப றிப்பரே.

வீரன் யானைப்படையானோடு பொருத்து

442.	அமர்புரி தமதக லத்தி டைக்கவிழ்
 	     அடுகரி நுதலில டிப்பர் இக்களி
றெமதென இருகண்வி ழிக்க உட்கினர்
     எனவிடு கிலர்படை ஞர்க்கு வெட்கியே.

கருணாகரன் போரில் முனைதல்

443.	அலகில் செருமுதிர் பொழுது வண்டையர்
 	     அரசன் அரசர்கள் நாதன் மந்திரி
உலகு புகழ்கரு ணாக ரன்றன
     தொருகை இருபணை வேழம் உந்தவே.

வெற்றிகாண இருபடையும் ஒருமுகப்பட்டமை

444.	உபய பலமும்வி டாது வெஞ்சமம்
 	     உடலு பொழுதினில் வாகை முன்கொள
அபயன் விடுபடை ஏழ்க லிங்கமும்
     அடைய ஒருமுக மாகி முந்தவே.

இருபடையும் கிளர்ந்தெழுந்தமை

445.	அணிகள் ஒருமுக மாக உந்தின
 	     அமரர் அமரது காண முந்தினர்
துணிகள் படமத மாமு றிந்தன
     துரக நிரையொடு தேர்மு றிந்தவே.

போரின் கடுமை

446.	விருதர் இருதுணி பார்நி றைந்தன
 	     விடர்கள் தலைமலை யாய்நெ ளிந்தன
குருதி குரைகடல் போல்ப ரந்தன
     குடர்கள் குருதியின் மேல்மி தந்தவே

இதுவும் அது

447.	கரிகள் கருவிகளோடு சிந்தின
 	     கழுகு நரியொடு காகம் உண்டன
திரைகள் திசைமலை யோட டர்ந்தன
     திமில குமிலமெ லாம்வி ளைந்தவே.

கலிங்க வேந்தன் பொருதலாற்றாது ஒதுங்கியமை

448.	புரசை மதமலை ஆயி ரங்கொடு
 	     பொருவ மெனவரும் ஏழ்க லிங்கர்தம்
அரசன் உரைசெய்த ஆண்மை யுங்கெட
     அமரில் எதிர்விழி யாதொ துங்கியே.

கலிங்க வேந்தன் களத்தைவிட்டு மறைந்து சென்றது

449.	அறியும் முழைகளி லோபதுங்கிய
 	     தரிய பிலனிடை யோம றைந்தது
செறியும் அடவியி லோக ரந்தது
     தெரிய அரியதெ னாஅ டங்கவே.

கலிங்கர் நடுக்கம்

450.	எதுகொல் இதுஇது மாயை ஒன்றுகொல்
 	     எரிகொல் மறலிகொல் ஊழியின்கடை
அதுகொல் எனவல றாவி ழுந்தனர்
     அலதி குலதியோ டேழ்க லிங்கரே.

கலிங்கர் சிதைந்தோடியது

451.	வழிவர் சிலர்கடல் பாய்வர் வெங்கரி
 	     மறைவர் சிலர்வழி தேடி வன்பிலம்
இழிவர் சிலர்சிலர் தூறு மண்டுவர்
     இருவர் ஒருவழி போகல் இன்றியே.

இதுவும் அது

452.	ஒருவர் ஒருவரின் ஓட முந்தினர்
 	     உடலின் நிழலினை ஓட அஞ்சினர்
அருவர் வருவரெ னாவி றைஞ்சினர்
     அபயம் அபயமெ னாந டுங்கியே

இதுவும் அது

453.	மழைகள் அதிர்வன போலு டன்றன
 	     வளவன் விடுபடை வேழம் என்றிருள்
முழைகள் நுழைவர்கள் போரில் இன்றுநம்
     முதுகு செயும்உப கார மென்பரே.

இதுவும் அது

454.	ஒருக லிங்கமொ ருவன ழித்தநாள்
 	ஒருக லிங்கமொ ருவரு டுத்ததே.

சோழர்படை யானை குதிரைகளைக் கைபற்றியது

455.	அப்படிக் கலிங்க ரோட
 	     அடர்த்தெறி சேனை வீரர்
கைப்படு களிறும் மாவும்
     கணித்துரைப் பவர்கள் யாரே?

கைப்பட்ட களிறுகளின் தன்மை

456.	புண்தரு குருதி பாயப்
 	     பொழிதரு கடமும் பாய
வண்டொடும் பருந்தி னோடும்
     வளைப்புண்ட களிற நேகம்.

இதுவும் அது

457.	ஒட்டறப் பட்ட போரில்
 	     ஊர்பவர் தம்மை வீசிக்
கட்டறுத் தவர்போல் நின்று
     கட்டுண்ட களிற நேகம்.

இதுவும் அது

458.	வரைசில புலிக ளோடு
 	     வந்தகட் டுண்ட வேபோல்
அரசருந் தாமும் கண்டுண்டு
     அகப்பட்ட களிற நேகம்.

சோழவீரர் கவர்ந்த பொருள்கள்

459.	நடைவ யப்பரி யிரதம் ஒட்டகம்
 	     நவதி திக்குல மகளிரென்று
அடைய வப்பொழுது அவர்கள் கைக்கொளும்
     அவைக ணிப்பதும் அருமையே.

கருணாகரன் கலிங்கவேந்தனைக் கொணருமாறு ஏவியது

460.	இவைக வர்ந்தபின் எழுக லிங்கர்தம்
 	     இறையை யுங்கொடு பெயர்துமென்று
அவனி ருந்துழி அறிக வென்றனன்
     அபயன் மந்திரி முதல்வனே.

ஒற்றர்கள் கலிங்கர்கோனைத் தேடியமை

461.	உரைகள் பிற்படு மளவில் ஒற்றர்கள்
 	     ஒலிக டற்படை கடிதுபோய்
வரைக ளில்புடை தடவி அப்படி
     வனமி லைப்புரை தடவியே

ஒற்றர்கள் மொழிந்தமை

462.	சுவடு பெற்றிலம் அவனை மற்றொரு
 	     சுவடு பெற்றனம் ஒருமலைக்
குவடு பற்றியது அவன டற்படை
     அதுகு ணிப்பரிது எனலுமே.

அதுகேட்ட படைஞர் செய்தி

463.	எக்குவடும் எக்கடலும் எந்தக் காடும்
 	     இனிக்கலிங்கர்க் கரணாவது இன்றே நாளும்
அக்குவடு மக்கடலும் வளைந்து வெய்யோன்
     அத்தமனக் குவடணையும் அளவிற் சென்றே.

படைஞர் குன்றைச் சூழ்ந்து நின்றமை

464.	தோலாத களிற்றபயன் வேட்டைப்பன்றி
 	     தொழுவடைத்துத் தொழுவதனைக் காப்பார்போல
வேலாலும் வில்லாலும் வேலி கோலி
     வெற்பதனை விடியளவுங் காத்து நின்றே.

குன்று காத்த கலிங்கவீரரை அழித்தமை

465.	செம்மலையாய் ஒளிபடைத்த தியாதோ என்றும்
 	     செங்கதிரோன் உதயஞ்செய்து உதய மென்னும்
அம்மலையோ இம்மலையும் என்னத் தெவ்வர்
     அழிகுருதி நதிபரக்க அறுக்கும் போழ்தில்.

கலிங்கர் மாற்றுருக்கொண்டு கரந்தமை

466.	வரைக்கலிங்கர் தமைச்சேர மாசை ஏற்றி
 	   வன்தூறு பறித்தமயிர்க் குறையும் வாங்கி
அரைக்கலிங்கம் உரிப்புண்ட கலிங்கர் எல்லாம்
    அமணரெனப் பிழைத்தாரும் அநேகர் ஆங்கே.

இதுவும் அது

467.	வேடத்தால் குறையாது முந்நூலாக
 	   வெஞ்சிலைநாண் மடித்திட்டு விதியாற் கங்கை
ஆடப்போந் தகப்பட்டோம் கரந்தோம் என்றே
    அரிதனைவிட்டு உயிர்பிழைத்தார் அநேகர் ஆங்கே.

   இதுவும் அது

468.	குறியாகக் குருதிகொடி ஆடை யாகக்
 	     கொண்டுடுத்துப் போர்த்துத்தங் குஞ்சி முண்டித்து
அறியீரோ சாக்கியரை யுடைகண் டால்என்
     அப்புறமென் றியம்பிடுவர் அநேகர் ஆங்கே.

இதுவும் அது 

469.	சேனைமடி களங்கண்டேம் திகைத்து நின்றேம்
 	     தெலுங்கரேம் என்றுசில கலிங்கர் தங்கள்
ஆனைமணி யினைத்தாளம் பிடித்துக் கும்பிட்டு
     அடிப்பாணர் எனப்பிழைத்தார் அநேகர் ஆங்கே.

சோழவீரர் கலிங்கர் அற அழித்தது

470.	இவர்கள்மேல் இனியொருவர் பிழைத்தார் இல்லை
 	     எழுகலிங்கத்து ஓவியர்கள் எழுதி வைத்த
சுவர்கள்மேல் உடலன்றி உடல்க ளெங்கும்
     தொடர்ந்துபிடித் தறுத்தார்முன் அடைய ஆங்கே.

கருணாகரன் குலோத்துங்கன் கழல் பணிந்தது

471.	கடற்கலிங்கம் எறிந்து சயத் தம்பம் நாட்டிக்
 	     கடகரியும் குவிதனமும் கவர்ந்து தெய்வச்
சுடர்ப்படைவாள் அபயனடி அருளி னோடுஞ்
     சூடினான் வண்டையர்கோன் தொண்டைமானே.
---------------
   13. களம் பாடியது (472-596) 

போர்க்களப் பெருமை

472.	தேவாசுரம் ராமாயணம் மாபாரதம் உளவென்று
 	ஓவாஉரை ஓயும்படி உளதப்பொரு களமே.

கலிங்கப்பேய் காளியைக் களம் காணுமாறு அழைத்தலும்
காளி களம் குறுகலும்

473.	காலக்கள மதுகண்டருள் இறைவீகடி தெனவே
 	ஆலக்கள முடையான்மகிழ் அமுதக்களம் அணுகி.

காளி போர்க்களங்கண்டு வியந்துமொழிந்தது 

474.	என்னேஒரு செருவெங்களம்
 	     எனவேயதி சயமுற்று
அந்நேரிழை அலகைக்கண
     மவைகண்டிட மொழியும்.

குருதி வெள்ளத்தில் யானை மிதந்து சென்றமை

475.	 உடலின்மேல் பலகாயஞ் சொரிந்து பின்கால்
 	     உடன்பதைப்ப உதிரத்தே ஒழுகும் யானை
கடலின்மேல் கலந்தொடரப் பின்னே செல்லுங்
     கலம்போன்று தோன்றுவன காண்மின் காண்மின்.

குதிரைகள் அடிபெயர்க்கலாற்றாது நின்றமை

476.	நெடுங்குதிரை மிசைக் கலணை சரியப் பாய்ந்து
 	     நிணச்சேற்றிற் கால்குளிப்ப நிரையே நின்று
படுங்குருதிக் கடும்புனலை அடைக்கப் பாய்ந்த
     பலகுதிரைத் தறிபோன்ற பரிசு காண்மின்.

வீரர் முகமலர்ந்து கிடந்தமை

477.	விருந்தினரும் வறியவரும் நெருங்கி யுண்ண
 	     மேன்மேலும் முகமலரும் மேலோர் போலப்
பருந்தினமும் கழுகினமும் தாமே யுண்ணப்
     பதுமமுகம் மலர்ந்தாரைப் பார்மின் பார்மின்.

குற்றுயிராய்க் கிடந்த வீரரை நரி சூழ்ந்திருந்தமை

478.	சாமளவும் பிறர்க்குதவா தவரை நச்சிச்
 	     சாருநர்போல் வீரருடல் தரிக்கும் ஆவி
போமளவும் அவரருகே இருந்து விட்டுப்
     போகாத நரிக்குலத்தின் புணர்ச்சி காண்மின்.

களத்தே வீழ்ந்து கிடக்கும் யானை இயல்பு

479.	மாமழைபோல் பொழிகின்ற தானவாரி
 	      மறுத்துவிழுங் கடகளிற்றை வெறுத்து வானோர்
பூமழைமேல் பாய்ந்தெழுந்து நிரந்த வண்டு
      பொருட்பெண்டிர் போன்றமையும் காண்மின் காண்மின்.

கொடியோடு வீழ்ந்து கிடக்கும் யானைகளைக் கூறியது

480.	சாய்ந்துவிழும் கடகளிற்றி னுடனே சாய்ந்து
 	      தடங்குருதி மிசைப்படியும் கொடிகள் தங்கள்
காந்தருடன் கனலமளி யதன்மேல் வைகுங்
      கற்புடைமா தரைஒத்தல் காண்மின் காண்மின்.

கணவரைத் தேடிய மனைவியர் செயல்

481.	தங்கணவ ருடன்தாமும் போக வென்றே
 	     சாதகரைக் கேட்பாரே தடவிப் பார்ப்பார்
எங்கணவர் கிடந்தவிடம் எங்கே யென்றென்று
     இடாகினியைக் கேட்பாரைக் காண்மின் காண்மின்.

கணவனைக்கண்டு ஆவிசோர்ந்த மனைவி இயல்பு

482.	வாய்மடித்துக் கிடந்ததலை மகனை நோக்கி
 	     மணியதரத்து ஏதேனும் வடுவுண் டாயோ
நீமடித்துக் கிடந்ததெனப் புலவி கூர்ந்து
     நின்றாவி சோர்வாளைக் காண்மின் காண்மின்.

கணவனைத் தழுவி உயிர்விட்ட பெண்டிர் இயல்பு

483.	தரைமகள்தன் கொழுநன்றன் உடலந் தன்னைத்
 	     தாங்காமல் தன்னுடலாற் றாங்கி விண்ணாட்
டரமகளிர் அவ்வுயிரைப் புணரா முன்னம்
     ஆவிஒக்க விடுவாளைக் காண்மின் காண்மின்.

கணவன் தலை பெற்ற மனைவியின் செயல்

484.	பொருதடக்கை வாளெங்கே மணிமார் பெங்கே
 	     போர்முகத்தில் எவர்வரினும் புறங்கொ டாத
பருவயிரத் தோளெங்கே எங்கே யென்று
     பயிரவியைக் கேட்பாளைக் காண்மின் காண்மின்.

எவ்விடமும் குருதிக்கறை யுண்டது

485.	ஆடற்று ரங்கம்பி டித்துஆளை யாளோட
 	     டித்துணிப்பு டைத்தவ்வி ரும்புண்ணினீர்
ஓடித்தெ றிக்கக்க ருங்கொண்டல் செங்கொண்டல்
     ஒக்கின்ற இவ்வாறு காண்மின்களோ.

நிணக்குவியலிடத்திருந்த காகங்களின் இயல்பு

486.	நெருங்குஆக வச்செங்க ளத்தேத
 	     யங்குந்நி ணப்போர்வை மூடிக்கொளக்
கருங்காகம் வெண்காக மாய்நின்ற
     வாமுன்பு காணாத காண்மின்களோ.

களம் தாமரைப் பொய்கை போன்று காட்சியளித்தது

487.	மிடையுற்ற தேர்மொட்டு மொட்டொக்க
 	   வெஞ்சோரி நீரொக்க வீழ்தொங்கல்பா
சடையொக்க அடுசெங்க ளம்பங்க
   யப்பொய்கை யாமாறு காண்மின்களோ.

வேல் தைத்து நிலத்துவிழா வீரர்நிலை

488.	வெயில்தாரை வேல்சூழ வும்தைக்க
 	   மண்மேல் விழாவீரர் வேழம்பர்தங்
கயிற்றா லிழுப்புண்டு சாயாது
   நிற்கும் கழாய்ஒத்தல் காண்மின்களோ.

களத்தில் கழுகும் பருந்தும் கண்ட காட்சி

489.	இருப்புக்க வந்தத்தின் மீதேற
 	     லும்சூரர் எஃகம்பு தைக்க இறகைப்
பரப்பிச்சு ழன்றிங்கொர் பாறாட
     ஈதோர் பருந்தாடல் காண்மின்களோ.

வில் வாள் வீரர் கிடந்தமை கண்டு கூறியது

490.	வருஞ்சேனை தஞ்சேனை மேல்வந்து
 	     றாமேவில் வாள்வீரர் வாணாளுகக்
கருஞ்சேவ கஞ்செய்து செஞ்சோற
     றச்செய்த கைம்மாறு காண்மின்களோ.

யானைவீரர் தலையின் காட்சி

491.	யானைப்ப டைச்சூரர் நேரான
 	     போழ்தற் றெழுந்தாடு கின்றார்தலை
மானச்ச யப்பாவை விட்டாடும்
     அம்மானை வட்டொத்தல் காண்மின்களோ.

விசும்பில் கண்ட காட்சி

492.	எதிர்கொளுஞ் சுரர்விமா னங்களிற் சுரர்களாய்
 	   ஏறுமா னவர்கள்தாம் எண்ணுதற் கருமையின்
கதிர்விசும் பதனிலே இதனிலும் பெரியதோர்
   காளையம் விளையுமா காண்மினோ காண்மினோ.

குருதிக் கடல்

493.	அவர்இபஞ் சொரிமதங் கழிஎனப் புகமடுத்
 	   தவர்பரித் திரையலைத் தமர்செய்கா லிங்கர்தம்
கவரிவெண் நுரைநிரைத் தவருடற் குருதியின்
   கடல்பரந் தோடுமா காண்மினோ காண்மினோ.

யானைநிரை கடலணை போன்றமை

494.	புவிபுரந் தருள்செயும் சயதரன் ஒருமுறைப்
 	     புணரிமெல் அணைபடப் பொருவில்வில் குனிதலின்
கவிகுலம் கடலிடைச் சொரிபெருங் கிரியெனக்
     கரிகளின் பிணம்இதிற் காண்மினோ காண்மினோ.

வில் திறன் கண்டு வியந்த வீரர் நிலை

495.	உற்றவாய் அம்புதம் பரிசையும் கருவியும்
 	     உருவிமார் பகலமும் உருவிவீழ் செருநர்வில்
கற்றவா ஒருவன்வில் கற்றவா என்றுதம்
     கைம்மறித் தவரையும் காண்மினோ காண்மினோ.

கண்விழித்துக் கிடக்கும் வீரர் நிலை

496.	விண்ணின்மொய்த் தெழுவிமா னங்களிற் சுரர்களாய்
 	     மீதுபோ முயிர்களே யன்றியே இன்றுதம்
கண்ணிமைப் பொழியவே முகமலர்ந் துடல்களும்
     கடவுளோர் போலுமா காண்மினோ காண்மினோ.

வெட்டுண்ட யானைத் தலைகளின் காட்சி

497.	பிறைப்பெ ரும்பணை வேழம் முன்னொடு
 	     பின்து ணிந்து தரைப்படும்
குறைத்த லைத்துணி கொல்லன் எஃகெறி
     கூடம் ஒத்தமை காண்மினோ.

வாய்புகு வேல்பற்றிக் கிடந்த வீரர்நிலை

498.	வாயி னில்புகு வேல்கள் பற்று
 	     வலக்கை யோடுநி லத்திடைச்
சாயு மற்றவர் காளம் ஊதிகள்
     தம்மை ஒத்தமை காண்மினோ.

வேல்ஊன்றித் தேர்மேல் நிற்பார்நிலை

499.	படவூன்று நெடுங்குந்தம் மார்பி னின்று
 	     பறித்தனை நிலத்தூன்றித் தேர்மேல் நிற்பார்
படவூன்றி விடுந்தொழிலோர் என்ன முன்னம்
     பசுங்குருதி நீர்தோன்றும் பரிசு காண்மின்.

நிணமென அம்பு வாய்கொண்ட பருந்தின் நிலை

500.	வாயகலம் பரத்தமொடு நிணங்கொண் டோட
 	     மற்றதனை வள்ளுகிரின் பருந்து கோணல்
வாய்அகலம் பரத்தினிடைக் கௌவி வல்வாய்
     வகிர்ப்பட்டு நிலம்பட்ட வண்ணங் காண்மின்.

பிணந்தின் பூதத்தின் செலவு

501.	சாதுரங்கத் தலைவனைப்போர்க் களத்தில் வந்த
 	      தழைவயிற்றுப் பூதந்தான் அருந்தி மிக்க
சாதுரங்கம் தலைசுமந்து கமஞ்சூல் கொண்டு
      தனிப்படுங்கார் எனவருமத் தன்மை காண்மின்.

மார்பில் விழுப்புண்பட்ட யானைவீரரைக் கூறியது.

502.	முதுகுவடிப் படியிருக்கும் என்ன நிற்கும்
 	     முனைக்களிற்றோர் செருக்களத்து முந்துதங்கள்
முதுகுவடுப் படும்என்ற வடுவை அஞ்சி
     முன்னம்வடுப் பட்டாரை இன்னம் காண்மின்.

காளி பேய்களைக் கூழடுமாறு மொழிந்தது

503.	களமடையக் காட்டுதற்கு முடிவ தன்று
 	     கவிழுமதக் கரிசொரியக் குமிழி விட்டுக்
குளமடைபட் டதுபோலும் குருதி யாடிக்
     கூழடுமின் என்றருளக் கும்பிட் டாங்கே.

பேய்கள் ஒன்றனையொன் றழைத்தல்

504.	குறுமோ டீநெடு நிணமா லாய்குடை கலதீ கூர்எயி றீநீலி
 	மறிமா டீகுதிர் வயிறீ கூழட வாரீர் கூழட வாரீரே.

பேய்கள் பல் துலக்கம்

505.	பறிந்த மருப்பின் வெண்கோலால்
 	     பல்லை விளக்கிக் கொள்ளீரே
மறிந்த களிற்றின் பழுஎலும்பை
     வாங்கி நாக்கை வழியீரே.

நகம் திருத்தலும் எண்ணெய் இடலும்

506.	வாயம் புகளாம் உகிர்கொள்ளி வாங்கி உகிரை வாங்கீரே
 	பாயுங் களிற்றின் மதத்தயிலம் பாயப் பாய வாரீரே.

எண்ணெய் தேய்த்தபின் முழுகல்

507.	எண்ணெய்போக வெண்மூளை
 	     என்னுங் களியான் மயிர் குழப்பிப்
பண்ணையாகக் குருதிமடுப்
     பாய்ந்து நீந்தி யாடீரே.

இதுவும் அது

508.	குருதிக் குட்ட மித்தனையுங் கோலும் வேலும் குந்தமுமே
 	கருவிக்கட்டு மாட்டாதீர் கரைக்கே இருந்து குளியீரே.

உடை உடுத்தல்

509.	ஆழ்ந்த குருதி மடுநீந்தி
 	     அங்கே இனையா திங்கேறி
வீழ்ந்த கலிங்கர் நிணக்கலிங்கம்
     விரித்து விரித்துப் புனையீரே.

கைவளையும் காலணியும் புனைதல்

510.	மதங்கொள் கரியின் கோளகையை
 	     மணிச்சூ டகமாச் செறியீரே
பதங்கொள் புரவிப் படிதரளப்
     பொற்பா டகமாப் புனையீரே.

காதணி புனைதல்

511.	ஈண்டும் செருவிற் படுவீரர்
 	     எறியும் பாரா வளையடுக்கி
வேண்டுமளவும் வாய்நெகிழ்த்து
     விடுகம் பிகளாப் புனையீரே.

இதுவும் அது

512.	பணைத்த பனைவெங் கரிக்கரத்தால்
 	     பரிய கருநாண் கட்டீரே
இணைத்த முரசம் வாள்காம்பிட்
     டிரட்டை வாளி ஏற்றீரே.

தோளணியும் கழுத்தணியும் புனைதல் 

513.	பட்ட புரவிக் கவிகுரத்தால்
 	     பாகு வலயஞ் சாத்தீரே
இட்ட சுரிசங் கெடுத்துக்கோத்து
     ஏகா வலியுஞ் சாத்தீரே.

வன்னசர மணிதல்

514.	பொருசின வீரர்தம் கண்மணியும்
 	     போதக மத்தக முத்தும்வாங்கி
வரிசைய றிந்து நரம்பிற்கோத்து
     வன்னச ரங்கள் அணியீரே.

பேய்கள் உணவு குறித்தெழல்

515.	கொள்ளும் எனைப்பல கோலமென்மேல்
 	     கொண்டிட வேளையும் மீதூர
உள்ளும் புறம்பும் வெதும்புங்காண்
     உண்பத னுக்கொருப் படுவீரே.

அடுக்களை அமைத்தல்

516.	மாகாய மதமலையின் பிணமலைமேல்
 	     வன்கழுகின் சிறகால் செய்த
ஆகாய மேற்கட்டி யதன்கீழே
     அடுக்களைகொண்டு அடுமி னம்மா.

மெழுகிக் கோலமிட்டு அடுப்பமைத்தல்

517.	பொழிமதத்தால் நிலமெழுகிப் பொடிந்துதிர்ந்த
 	     பொடித்தரளப் பிண்டி தீட்டி
அழிமதத்த மத்தகத்தை அடுப்பாகக்
     கடுப்பாக்கொண்டு அடுமி னம்மா.

பானையை அடுப்பேற்றுதல்

518.	கொற்றவாள் மறவர் ஓச்சக் குடரோடு தலையுங் காலும்
 	அற்றுவீழ் ஆனைப் பானை அடுப்பினில் ஏற்று மம்மா.

உணவுப் பண்டம் கொணர்தல்

519.	வெண்டயிரும் செந்தயிரும் விராய்க்கிடந்த
 	     கிழான் போல வீரர் மூளைத்
தண்டயிரும் மிடைவித்த புளிதமுமாத்
     தாழிதொறும் தம்மி னம்மா.

உலைவைத்தல்

520.	கொலையினுட் படுகரிக் குழிசியுட் கூழினுக்
 	குலையெனக் குதிரையின் உதிரமே சொரிமினோ

காயமும் உப்பும் இடுதல்

521.	துள்ளிவெங் களனில்வீழ் துரகவெண் பல்லெனும்
 	உள்ளியுங் கிள்ளியிட் டுகிரினுப்பு இடுமினோ.

தீமூட்டுதல்

522.	தனிவிசும் படையினும் படைஞர்கண் தவிர்கிலா
 	முனிவுஎனுங் கனலைநீர் மூளவைத் திடுமினோ.

விறகுகொண்டு எரித்தல்

523.	குந்தமும் பகழியும் கோல்களும் வேலுமாம்
 	இந்தனம் பலவெடுத்து இடைமடுத் தெரிமினோ.

அரிசி கொணர்தல்

524.	கல்லைக் கறித்துப் பல்முறிந்து
 	     தவிழ்ந்து வீழ்ந்த கலிங்கர்தம்
பல்லைத் தகர்த்துப் பழஅரிசி
     ஆகப் பண்ணிக் கொள்ளீரே.

அரிசி குற்றும் உரல்

525.	சுவைக்கும் முடிவில் கூழினுக்குச்
 	     சொரியும் அரிசி வரிஎயிறா
அவைக்கும் உரல்கள் எனக்குரல்கள்
     அவிந்த முரசம் கொள்ளீரே.

உலக்கை கொண்டு குற்றல்

526.	இந்த உரற்கண் இவ்வரிசி
 	     எல்லாம் பெய்து கொல்யானைத்
தந்த உலக்கை தனையோச்சிச்
     சலுக்கு முலுக்கெனக் குற்றீரே.

காளியைப் பாடி அரிசி குற்றுதல்

527.	தணந்த மெலிவு தான்தீரத்
 	     தடித்த உடல்வெம் பசிதீரப்
பிணந்தரு நாச்சியைப் பாடீரே
     பெருந்திரு வாட்டியைப் பாடீரே.

குலோத்துங்கனைப் பாடிக் குற்றுதல்

528.	கவன நெடும்பரி வீரதரன்
 	     காவிரி நாடுடை யானிருதோள்
அவனி சுமந்தமை பாடீரே
     அரவு தவிர்ந்தமை பாடீரே.
சேரர் பாண்டியரை வென்றமை கூறிக் குற்றுதல்

529.	மன்னர் புரந்தரன் வாளபயன்
 	      வாரணம் இங்கு மதம்படவே
தென்னர் உடைந்தமை பாடீரே
     சேரர் உடைந்தமை பாடீரே.

சேரர் பாண்டியர் வணங்கியது கூறிக் குற்றுதல்

530.	வணங்கிய சேரர் மணிமுடியும்
 	      வழுதியர் தங்கள் மணிமுடியும்
பிணங்கிய சேவடி பாடீரே
     பெருமான் திருவடி பாடீரே.

வடஅரசரை அடிப்படுத்தியது கூறிக்குற்றுதல்

531.	ஒளிறு நெடும்படை வாளபயற்
 	     குத்தர பூமியர் இட்டதிறைக்
களிறு வரும்படி பாடீரே
     கடமத நாறுவ பாடீரே.

கடற்றீவகத்து வென்றிகொண்ட தன்மை கூறிக் குற்றுதல்

532.	பௌவம் அடங்க வளைந்த குடைப்
 	      பண்டித சோழன் மலர்க்கழலில்
தெவ்வர் பணிந்தமை பாடீரே
     சிலையா டியவலி பாடீரே.

உலகம் மகிழ ஆட்சிபுரிதல் கூறிக் குற்றுதல்

533.	எற்றைப் பகலினும் வெள்ளணிநாள்
 	      இருநிலப் பாவை நிழலுற்ற
கொற்றக் குடையினைப் பாடீரே.
     குலோத்துங்கன் சோழனைப் பாடீரே.

கருணாகரனைப் பாடிக் குற்றியது

534.	வண்டை வளம்பதி பாடீரே
 	     மல்லையும் கச்சியும் பாடீரே
பண்டை மயிலையும் பாடீரே
     பல்லவர் தோன்றலைப் பாடீரே.

இதுவும் அது

535.	காட்டிய வேழ அணிவாரிக்
 	     கலிங்கப் பரணிநங் காவலன்மேற்
சூட்டிய தோன்றலைப் பாடீரே
     தொண்டையர் வேந்தனைப் பாடீரே.

மீண்டும் குலோத்துங்கனை பாடிக் குற்றியது

536.	இடைபார்த்துக் திறைகாட்டி இறைவிதிருப் புருவத்தின்
 	கடைபார்த்துத் தலைவணங்கும் கதிர்முடிநூ றாயிரமே.

பல்லரசரும் அடிவணங்கல் கூறிக் குற்றியது

537.	முடிசூடும் முடியொன்றே முதலபயன் எங்கோமான்
 	அடிசூடும் முடியெண்ணில் ஆயிரநூ றாயிரமே.

பகைவேந்தர் அழிந்தமை கூறிக் குற்றுதல்

538.	முடியினால் வழிபட்டு மொழிந்ததிறை இடாவேந்தர்
 	அடியினால் மிதிபட்ட அருவரைநூ றாயிரமே.

மாற்றரசர் ஒளி இழந்த தன்மை கூறிக் குற்றியது

539.	தார்வேய்ந்த புயத்தபயன் தன்னமைச்சர் கடைத்தலையில்
 	பார்வேந்தர் படுகின்ற பரிபவம்நூ றாயிரமே.

மறைவளர்த்தமை கூறிக் குற்றியது

540.	தாங்காரப் புயத்தபயன் தண்ணளியால் புயல்வளர்க்கும்
 	ஓங்கார மந்திரமும் ஒப்பிலநூ றாயிரமே.

உலகமுழுதும் ஆண்ட மேன்மை கூறிக் குற்றியது

541.	போர்தாங்கும் களிற்றபயன் புயமிரண்டும் எந்நாளும்
 	பார்தாங்கப் பரந்தீர்ந்த பணிப்பணம்நூ றாயிரமே.

குலோத்துங்கன் திருமாலேயாகக் கூறிக் குற்றியது

542.	நாற்கடலைக் கவித்தகுடை நரதுங்கன் அமுதமெழப்
 	பாற்கடலைக் கடைந்தருளும் பணைப்புயம்நூ றாயிரமே.

இதுவும் அது

543.	தாளிரண்டால் நிலவேந்தர் தலைதாங்கும் சயதுங்கன்
 	தோளிரண்டால் வாணனைமுன் துணித்ததோள் ஆயிரமே.

இதுவும் அது

544.	சூழிமுகக் களிற்றபயன் தூதுநடந் தருளியநாள்
 	ஆழிமுதற் படையெடுத்த அணிநெடுந்தோ ளாயிரமே.

குற்றிய அரிசியைப் புடைத்தல்

545.	பல்லரிசி யாவுமிகப் பழவரிசி தாமாகச்
 	சல்லவட்டம் எனுஞ்சுளகால் தவிடுபடப் புடையீரே.

புடைத்த அரிசியை அளத்தல்

546.	பாணிகளால் நிலந்திருத்திப் படைக்கலிங்கர் அணிபகழித்
 	தூணிகளே நாழிகளாத் தூணிமா அளவீரே.

அளந்த அரிசியை உலையிலிடல்

547.	விரற்புட்டி லவைசிறிய விற்கூடை பெரியனகொண்டு
 	உரற்பட்ட அரிசிமுகந்து உலைகள்தொறும் சொரியீரே.

உலையிலிட்ட அரசிக்குத் துடுப்பும் அகப்பையும்

548.	களப்பரணிக் கூழ்பொங்கி வழியாமல் கைதுடுப்பா
 	அளப்பரிய குளப்புக்கால் அகப்பைகளாக் கொள்ளீரே.

அட்ட கூழைப் பதம் பார்த்தல்

549.	வைப்புக் காணு நமக்கின்று
 	      வாரீர் கூழை எல்லீரும்
உப்புப் பார்க்க ஒருதுள்ளி
     உள்ளங் கையிற் கொள்ளீரே.

வெந்த கூழை நன்கு கிண்டுதல்

550.	அழலைக் கையிற் கொள்ளாமே
 	     அடுப்பை அவித்துக் கைத்துடுப்பாற்
சுழலச் சுழலப் புடைஎங்கும்
     துழாவித் துழாவிக் கொள்ளீரே.

கையாற் பதம் பார்த்துக் கூழை இறக்கல்

551.	பற்றிப் பாரீர் இனிக்கூழின்
 	      பதமும் சுவையும் பண்டுண்ட
மற்றைக் கூழின் மிகநன்று
     வாரீர் இழிச்ச வாரீரே.

இதுவும் அது

552.	எடுத்துக் கைகள் வேகாமே
 	      இவுளித் துணியிட்டு இருமருங்கும்
அடித்துப் பிடித்து மெத்தனவே
     அடுப்பி னின்றும் இழிச்சீரே.

கூழின் மிகுதி

553.	ஒருவாய் கொண்டே இதுதொலைய
 	      உண்ண வொண்ணாது என்றென்று
வெருவா நின்றீர் ஆயிரம்வாய்
     வேண்டு மோஇக் கூழுணவே.

இதுவும் அது

554.	வெந்த இரும்பிற் புகும்புனல்போல்
 	     வெந்தீப் பசியால் வெந்துஎரியும்
இந்தவிடம்பை நாத்தோய்க்கில்
    இக்கூ ழெல்லாம் சுவறாதோ.

இதுவும் அது

555.	பண்டு மிகுமோ பரணிக்கூழ்
 	     பார கத்தில் அறியேமோ
உண்டு மிகுமோ நீர்சொன்ன
    உபாயம் இதுவும் செய்குவமே.

உணவுக்குமுன் நீர் வைத்துக்கொள்ளுதல்

556.	வெம்பும் குருதிப் பேராற்றில்
 	     வேண்டும் தண்ணீர் வேழத்தின்
கும்பங் களிலே முகந்தெடுத்துக்
    குளிர வைத்துக் கொள்ளீரே.

உணவுகொள்ள நிலம் திருத்தல்

557.	சோரும் களிற்றின் வாலதியால்
 	     சுழல அலகிட்டு அலைகுருதி
நீருந் தெளித்துக் கலம்வைக்க
    நிலமே சமைத்துக் கொள்ளீரே.

உண்கலம் அமைத்தல்

558.	போர்மண் டலிகர் கேடகத்தின்
 	     புளகச் சின்னம் பரப்பீரே
பார்மண் டலிகர் தலைமண்டை
    பலமண் டைகளாக் கொள்ளீரே.

இதுவும் அது

559.	அழிந்த கலிங்கர் பொற்பரிசை
 	   அவைபொற் கலமாக் கொள்ளீரே
விழுந்த தவளக் குடைமின்னும்
  வெள்ளிக் கலமாக் கொள்ளீரே.

கூழைப் பங்கிடக் கருவி கொண்டது

560.	நிலத்தைச் சமைத்துக் கொள்ளீரே
 	   நெடுங்கைக் களிற்றின் இருசெவியாம்
கலத்திற் கொள்ளக் குறையாத
  கலங்கள் பெருக்கிக் கொள்ளீரே.

பகல் விளக்கும் பாவாடையும்

561.	கதம்பெற் றார்க்கும் செறுநர்விழிக்
 	   கனலும் நிணமும் அணங்கின்பால்
பதம்பெற் றார்க்குப் பகல்விளக்கும்
  பாவா டையுமாக் கொள்ளீரே.

உணவு கொள்ள அழைத்தது

562.	பரிசு படவே கலம்பரப்பிப்
 	   பந்தி பந்தி படஉங்கள்
வரிசை யுடனே இருந்துண்ண
  வாரீர் கூழை வாரீரே.

உணவுபடைக்க அகப்பை கொள்ளல்

563.	கங்கா புரியின் மதிற்புறத்துக்
 	   கருதார் சிரம்போய் மிகவீழ
இங்கே தலையின் வேல்பாய்ந்த
  இவைமூ ழைகளாக் கொள்ளீரே.

மடையர்களைத் தேர்ந்தெடுத்தல்

564.	கிடைக்கப் பொருது மணலூரில்
 	     கீழ்நாள் அட்ட பரணிக்கூழ்
படைத்துப் பயின்ற மடைப்பேய்கள்
     பந்தி தோறும் வாரீரே.

பிச்சை ஏற்கும் பார்ப்பனப் பேய்க்குக் கூழளித்தல்

565.	அவதி இல்லாச் சுவைக்கூழ் கண்டு
 	     அங்காந்து அங்காந்து அடிக்கடியும்
பவதி பிட்சாந் தேகியெனும்
     பனவப் பேய்க்கு வாரீரே.

சமண்பேய்கட்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

566.	உயிரைக் கொல்லாச் சமண்பேய்கள்
 	     ஒருபோழ் துண்ணும் அவையுண்ண
மயிரைப் பார்த்து நிணத்துகிலால்
     வடித்துக் கூழை வாரீரே.

புத்தப்பேய்க்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

567.	முழுத்தோல் போர்க்கும் புத்தப்பேய்
 	     மூளைக் கூழை நாக்குழறக்
கழுத்தே கிட்ட மனந்திரியாக்
     கஞ்சி யாக வாரீரே.

பார்வைப் பேய்க்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

568.	கொய்த இறைச்சி உறுப்பனைத்தும்
 	      கொள்ளுங் கூழை வெள்ளாட்டின்
பைதல் இறைச்சி தின்றுலர்ந்த
     பார்வைப் பேய்க்கு வாரீரே.

குருட்டுப் பேய்களுக்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

569.	ஊணா தரிக்கும் கள்ளப்பேய்
 	     ஒளித்துக் கொண்ட கலந்தடவிக்
காணாது அரற்றுங் குருட்டுப்பேய்
     கைக்கே கூழை வாரீரே.

ஊமைப் பேய்க்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

570.	பையாப் போடு பசிகாட்டிப்
 	     பதலை நிறைந்த கூழ்காட்டிக்
கையால் உரைக்கும் ஊமைப்பேய்
    கைக்கே கூழை வாரீரே.

சூற்பேய்க்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

571.	அடைந்த செவிகள் திறந்தனவால்
 	     அடியேற்கு என்று கடைவாயைத்
துடைத்து நக்கிச் சுவைகாணும்
    சூற்பேய்க்கு இன்னும் சொரியீரே.

அறிவற்ற பேய்க்கு கூழ்வார்த்தல்

572.	பொல்லா ஓட்டைக் கலத்துக்கூழ்
 	      புறத்தே ஒழுக மறித்துப்பார்த்து
எல்லாங் கவிழ்த்துத் திகைத்திருக்கும்
     இழுதைப் பேய்க்கு வாரீரே.

நோக்கப் பேய்க்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

573.	துதிக்கைத் துணியைப் பல்லின்மேற்
 	      செவ்வே நிறுத்தித் துதிக்கையின்
நுதிக்கே கூழை வார்என்னும்
     நோக்கப் பேய்க்கு வாரீரே.

கூத்திப் பேய்க்கு கூழ் வார்த்தல்

574.	தடியான் மடுத்துக் கூழெல்லாம்
 	      தானே பருகித் தன்கணவன்
குடியான் என்று தான்குடிக்கும்
     கூத்திப் பேய்க்கு வாரீரே.

விருந்தாக வந்த பேய்க்குக் கூழருத்தல்

575.	வருகூழ்ப் பரணிக் களங்கண்டு
 	    வந்த பேயை முன்னூட்டி
ஒருகூழ்ப் பரணி நாமிருக்கும்
    ஊர்க்கட் பேய்க்கு வாரீரே.

கனவு கண்டுரைத்த பேய்க்கு இரட்டைப்பங்கு கொடுத்தல்

576.	இரவு கனவு கண்டபேய்க்கு
 	    இற்றைக் கன்றி நாளைக்கும்
புரவி உரித்தோற் பட்டைக்கே
    கூழைப் பொதிந்து வையீரே.

கணக்குப் பேய்க்குக் கூழ் வார்த்தல்

577.	இணக்கம் இல்லா நமையெல்லாம்
 	     எண்ணிக் கண்டேம் என்றுரைக்கும்
கணக்கப் பேய்க்கும் அகங்களிக்கக்
    கையால் எடுத்து வாரீரே.

பேய்கள் உண்ணுதல்

578.	மென்குடர் வெள்ளைகு தட்டீரே
 	     மெல்விரல் இஞ்சிய துக்கீரே
முன்கையெ லும்பினை மெல்லீரே
     மூளையை வாரிவி ழுங்கீரே.

இதுவும் அது

579.	அள்ளிய ருகிருந் துண்ணீரே
 	     அரிந்திடு தாமரை மொட்டென்னும்
உள்ளிக றித்துக்கொண் டுண்ணீரே
     ஊதிவ ரன்றிக்கொண் டுண்ணீரே.

இதுவும் அது

580.	தமக்கொரு வாயொடு வாய்மூன்றும்
 	     தாமினி தாப்படைத் துக்கொண்டு
நமக்கொரு வாய்தந்த நான்முகனார்
    நாணும் படிகளித் துண்ணீரே.

இதுவும் அது

581.	ஓடி உடல்வியர்த் துண்ணீரே
 	     உந்தி பறந்திளைத் துண்ணீரே
ஆடி அசைந்தசைந் துண்ணீரே
    அற்ற தறவறிந் துண்ணீரே.

உண்டவாய் பூசல்

582.	கொதித்த கரியின் கும்பத்துக்
 	     குளிர்ந்த தண்ணீர் தனைமொண்டு
பொதுத்த தொளையால் புகமடுத்துப்
    புசித்த வாயைப் பூசீரே.

உண்டபின் வெற்றிலைபாக்கு அயிலுதல்

583.	பண்ணும் இவுளிச் செவிச்சுருளும்
 	     பரட்டிற் பிளவும் படுகலிங்கர்
கண்ணின் மணியிற் சுண்ணாம்பும்
     கலந்து மடித்துத் தின்னீரே.

பேருண்டி கொண்ட குற்றமொழிய மருந்து

584.	பெருக்கத் தின்றீர் தாம்பூலம்
 	     பிழைக்கச் செய்தீர் பிழைப்பீரே
செருக்கும் பேய்காள் பூதத்தின்
     சிரத்தின் மயிரை மோவீரே.

பேய்கள் களித்துக் கூத்தாடல்

585.	என்றுக ளித்துக் குமண்டையிட்டே
 	   ஏப்ப மிட்டுப் பருத்துநின்ற
குன்றுகு னிப்பன போற்களத்துக்
  கும்பிட் டேநட மிட்டனவே

இதுவும் அது

586.	வாசிகி டக்கக் கலிங்கரோட
 	   மானதன் ஏவிய சேனைவீரர்
தூசியெ ழுந்தமை பாடி நின்று
  தூசியும் இட்டுநின் றாடினவே.

இதுவும் அது

587.	பொருகை தவிர்ந்து கலிங்கரோடப்
 	      போக புரந்தரன் விட்டதண்டின்
இருகையும் வென்றதோர் வென்றிபாடி
     இருகையும் வீசிநின் றாடினவே.

பேய்கள் களித்து விளையாடல்

588.	வழுதியர் வரைமுழை நுழைவடி விதுஎன
 	      மதகரி வயிறுகள் புகநுழை வனசில
எழுதிய சிலையவர் செறிகடல் விழுமவை
     இதுஎன வழிகுரு தியின்விழு வனசில.

இதுவும் அது

589.	உருவிய சுரிகையொ டுயர்கணை விடுபடை
 	      உருள்வடி விதுவென உருள்வன சிலசில
வெருவிய விடுநர்தம் உடைவடி விதுவென
     விரிதலை யதனொடு மறிவன சிலசில.

பேய்கள் குலோத்துங்கனை வாழ்த்தல்

590.	உபய மெனும்பிறப் பாளர்ஏத்த
 	     உரைத்த கலிங்கர் தமைவென்ற
அபயன் அருளினைப் பாடினவே
     அணிசெறி தோளினை வாழ்த்தினவே.

இதுவும் அது

591.	திசையிற் பலநர பாலர்முன்னே
 	     தெரிந்துரைக் குஞ்சிசு பாலன்வைத
வசையில் வயப்புகழ் வாழ்த்தினவே
     மனுகுல தீபனை வாழ்த்தினவே.

இதுவும் அது

592.	பொன்னித் துறைவனை வாழ்த்தினவே
 	      பொருநைக் கரையனை வாழ்த்தினவே
கன்னிக் கொழுநனை வாழ்த்தினவே
     கங்கை மணாளனை வாழ்த்தினவே.

இதுவும் அது

593.	ஆழிகள் ஏழுமொர் ஆழியின்கீழ்
 	      அடிப்பட வந்த அகலிடத்தை
ஊழிதொ றூழியுங் காத்தளிக்கும்
     உலகுய்ய வந்தானை வாழ்த்தினவே.

கரிகாலச் சோழனோடு ஒப்பிட்டுப் பேய்கள் வாழ்த்தியது

594.	பூப்பது மத்தன் படைத்தமைத்த
 	      புவியை இரண்டா வதும்படைத்துக்
காப்பதும் என்கடன் என்றுகாத்த
     கரிகாலச் சோழனை வாழ்த்தினவே.

வாழ்த்துக் கூறியது

595.	யாவ ரும்களி சிறக்கவே தருமம்
 	     எங்கும் என்றும்உள தாகவே
தேவர் இன்னருள் தழைக்கவே முனிவர்
    செய்த வப்பயன் விளைக்கவே.

இதுவும் அது

596.	வேத நன்னெறி பரக்கவே அபயன்
 	      வென்ற வெங்கலி கரக்கவே
பூத லம்புகழ் பரக்கவே புவி
     நிலைக்க வேபுயல் சுரக்கவே.
--------------


This file was last updated on 12 June 2020. 
Feel free to send the corrections to the webmaster. 


